REP-2004: Package Quality Categories (#218)
ros-infrastructure/rep: rep-2004.rst

REP: 2004
Title: Package Quality Categories
Author: William Woodall <william@openrobotics.org>
Status: Active
Type: Informational
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 17-Dec-2019
Post-History: 17-Dec-2019

Abstract
========

This REP describes a set of categories which are meant to convey the quality, or at least the maturity, of packages in the ROS ecosystem.
Inclusion in one category or another is based on the policies to which the packages adhere.
The categories are meant to give some expectation as to the quality of a package and allows the maintainers to be more strict with some packages and less so with others.

> The purpose of these categories is not to enforce quality, but to set expectations for consumers of the packages and to encourage maintainers of the packages to document how their package's policies achieve that quality level.

Reviewer: > The purpose of these categories is not to enforce quality, but to set expectations for consumers of the packages

That makes sense, although after an admittedly quick read I see no way for that quality level to be conveyed to consumers unless they visit the code repository in question. One of the ways we convey this type of thing to our users in Ubuntu is with [repository components](https://help.ubuntu.com/community/Repositories#Components); have you considered doing something similar?

Author: Yeah, basically I think we should have something like Ubuntu's repository components, or just a list of packages in each category, but I didn't want to a) mandate one in this REP or b) limit it to just one list (maybe other third-parties can have lists with different scope or strictness levels). At the end of the day, any list is editorial in nature, not 100% objective.

      * May provide branch coverage
      * May exclude code from coverage (test code, debug code, etc.)
      * Must require coverage to increase or stay the same before merging a change, but...
      * May accept a change that decreases coverage with proper justification (e.g. deleting code that was previously covered can cause the percentage to drop)

  * Performance:

    * Must have performance tests (exceptions allowed if they don't make sense to have)
    * Must have a performance regression policy (i.e. blocking either changes or releases on unexpected performance regressions)
    * [ROS Core]:

      * May have performance tests, strongly recommended, but for some packages it doesn't make sense
      * If there are performance tests, must choose to either check each change or before each release or both
      * If there are performance tests, must require justification for merging a change or making a release that lowers performance

  * Linters and Static Analysis

    * Must have a code style and enforce it.
    * Must use static analysis tools where applicable.
    * [ROS Core]:

>       * Must use ROS code style and use linters from ``ament_lint_common`` to enforce it

Reviewer 2: IMHO, `clang-tidy` should be one of the linters in `ament_lint_common`.

Author: Perhaps so, but for me that's an issue to be filed with `ament_lint_common`, and should stay out of this REP (since the list of linters and analyzers may change over time and updating the REP is tedious.

REP: 2004
Title: Package Quality Categories
Author: William Woodall <william@openrobotics.org>
Status: Active
Type: Informational
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 17-Dec-2019
Post-History: 17-Dec-2019

Abstract
========

This REP describes a set of categories which are meant to convey the quality, or at least the maturity, of packages in the ROS ecosystem.
Inclusion in one category or another is based on the policies to which the packages adhere.
The categories are meant to give some expectation as to the quality of a package and allows the maintainers to be more strict with some packages and less so with others.

> The purpose of these categories is not to enforce quality, but to set expectations for consumers of the packages and to encourage maintainers of the packages to document how their package's policies achieve that quality level.

Author: The package maintainers get to claim and justify their quality level, this document does not set in place a certification process, certification regime, or proposed automated system(s) that _enforces_ that packages only claim levels that they meet.

The best this can offer is "this package claims level X with this justification" and the user can evaluate the justification themselves or look for a peer-reviewed list of level X packages to see if this package is on that list. At which point they could trust the peer-review process, but there's nothing in this document that ensures packages are following the rules.

> The purpose of these categories is not to enforce quality, but to set expectations for consumers of the packages and to encourage maintainers of the packages to document how their package's policies achieve that quality level.

Reviewer 3: Maybe it could be reworded slightly?

> The purpose of these categories is to establish guidelines for compliance with various quality levels.  It is up to the package maintainers to establish processes and document their compliance with a given category.

The documented policies allow consumers of the packages to consider any caveats for the package or its dependencies when deciding whether or not the package meets the standards for their project.

Specification
=============

> The categories also provide rough goals for packages to strive towards, encouraging better quality across the ecosystem.

Author: This is part of what I haven't fix in the reformatting... and why I didn't share it more widely yet... :p

    * are general solutions used by many people, but are only sometimes used for production systems

  * e.g. ``navigation2``, ``rosbag2``, etc.

* Quality Level 3:

  * tooling quality packages
  * e.g. ``ros2cli``, ``rviz``, ``rqt``, etc.

* Quality Level 4:

  * demos, tutorials, and experiments
  * e.g. research packages, ``demo_nodes_cpp``, ``examples_rclcpp_minimal_publisher``, etc.

While each quality level will have different requirements, it's always possible to overachieve in certain requirements even if other requirements prevent a package from moving up to the next quality level.

Quality Level 1
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This category should be used for packages which are required for a reasonable ROS system in a production environment.
That is to say that after you remove development tools, build tools, and introspection tools, these packages are still left over as requirements for a basic ROS system to run.
However, that does not mean that packages that would not normally fit this description should never be called 'Level 1'.
If there is a need for a particular package in a reasonable production scenario, then that package should be considered for this category as well.

> However, packages which we consider essential to getting a robot up and running quickly, but perhaps is a generic solution to the problem should probably not start out as 'Level 1' due to the high effort in getting a package to 'Level 1' and maintaining it there.

Author: Sorry, it should be "a problem", I was thinking of something like move_base for navigation (generic and powerful, but often not the ideal solution to a narrow problem).

> For example, the packages which provide intra-process communication, inter-process communication, generated message runtime code, node lifecycle, etc. should probably all be considered for 'Level 1'.

Author: I was thinking "the", but dropping the "the" here is fine too and more inclusive (there might be non-core packages, or alternatives, that provide this in the future).

However, a package which provides pose estimation (like ``robot_pose_ekf``\ ) is a generic solution for something that most people need, but is often replaced with a domain specific solution in production, and therefore it should probably not start out as 'Level 1'.
However, it may upgrade to it at a later date, if it proves to be a solution that people want to use in their products.

Tools, like ``rostopic``\ , generally do not fall into this category either, but are not categorically excluded.
For example, it may be the case the tool which launches and verifies a ROS graph (``ros2launch``\ ) may need to be considered 'Level 1' for use in production systems.

Package Requirements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*Note: bullets below that start with [ROS Core], will be the prescription for what we do in the core packages in order to meet the associated requirements*

Requirements to be considered a 'Level 1' package:

* Version Policy:

  * Must have a version policy (e.g. ``semver``)

>   * Must be at a stable version (e.g. for ``semver`` that means have a version >= 1.0.0)

Author: I had that originally, but I wanted this to be more inclusive. Some existing projects already have versioning schemes and won't be convinced to change. I don't think we need any requirements for the version policy, just that it exists and is well understood by the consumers (i.e. documented).

The added inclusiveness is helpful if you want to try and apply these requirements to an external dependency (e.g. something like opencv or eigen).

I'd leave this as-is unless you or someone else feels strongly about it.

>   * Must be at a stable version (e.g. for ``semver`` that means have a version >= 1.0.0)

Reviewer 4: Does this REP target ROS packages, or "all" software in "the ROS ecosystem"? If the former: I would say we could require what makes sense. For non-ROS packages, it would not seem necessary.

The REP later on already allows "explaining" why a non-ROS dependency qualifies for a certain level even if it doesn't follow all requirements put forth here. It doesn't seem necessary for this section to be inclusive of other versioning schemes then.

>   * Must be at a stable version (e.g. for ``semver`` that means have a version >= 1.0.0)

Reviewer 5: tl;dr Do we really want semver for the core?

---

ROS core packages haven't historically _really_ used semver. And that's probably ok and by design, so maybe we should think twice about trying to introduce semver into ROS 2 core. It seems that the way of communicating stability in the core is to be within a distribution, regardless of whether the major version is still 0.

If ROS maintainers don't use semver to communicate compatibility, maybe we don't want or need semver. Let's take `rclcpp` for example. If we tell a downstream consumer that it is following semver, they look at version 0 and assume no guarantees are made about stability, but that's not true. Version `0.7.7` is guaranteed to be API compatible with `0.7.11`, because they're both on Dashing. The same goes for `0.8.0` and `0.8.1`, both on Eloquent. It seems that minors are being treated as semver's majors.

Talking to @dirk-thomas, it seems like version 1.0.0 is not waiting for API stability, but for a deep API review. It almost feels like on the "**rosver™**"  scheme, a version 2.0.0 of a core package would warrant a refactor into ROS 3 :sweat_smile: 

If we're not using majors to communicate API compatibility, minors to communicate backwards compatible feature additions and patches to communicate bug fixes, why use semver?

>   * Must be at a stable version (e.g. for ``semver`` that means have a version >= 1.0.0)

Reviewer 6: I'd say we're following semver, albeit conservatively at the moment. Currently minor versions are coupled with the distro and once we bump to 1.0.0, the major version will be coupled with the distro.

>   * Must be at a stable version (e.g. for ``semver`` that means have a version >= 1.0.0)

Author: I think discussions have happened elsewhere in the meantime, but just to tie this end up...

---

> > The added inclusiveness is helpful if you want to try and apply these requirements to an external dependency (e.g. something like opencv or eigen).

> But those are not ROS packages?

No, but that was just one example. I think the more compelling example (now that I think about it more) is that of something like `cartographer_ros`, which is a ROS package, but comes from another community which maybe prefers a different versioning scheme (that may not be the case, but just as an example). Who's to say they should use semver in their wrapper and not the versioning scheme of the thing that they wrap? I think it would be reasonable for them to do so, but acceptable if they choose not to, so long as their version scheme is sufficient. If anything, structuring it like it is just clarifies what it is about semver that is valuable in this document. This serves to underscore why a version scheme like semver is useful here and it also makes it easier for developers trying to justify a different version scheme if they feel they need to do so.

I definitely see what your perspective, and I think it is valid, but personally I prefer the flexibility of how it is worded now, and for all intents and purposes I believe users will take this away as "use semver", as that will the recommendation in our developer guide, and that is what we will use (many people just copy the standards of core packages when setting their own up). So again, leaving it as-is would be my preference. But if there are others that agree with you instead please speak up and I'll reconsider it.

---

> tl;dr Do we really want semver for the core?

I think so.

`semver` has more to do with "if the version changed, what can I imply from the delta?" and less to do with "what can be changed in a single ROS distribution". Also, `semver` is another "familiar" thing for new developers and one less "special ROS thing" they have to put up with. So, I think it's a good thing to do (but not absolutely required) to move to 1.0.0 and follow semver.

Whether or not we use semver, we'll still have conventions about what changes within a ROS distribution as we do now.

  * Must have a strictly declared public API
  * Must have a policy for API stability
  * Must have a policy for ABI stability

>   * Must have a policy that keeps API and ABI stability within a released ROS Distribution

Author: I don't know what that would look like. What kind of analysis/tools are you thinking about?

>   * Must have a policy that keeps API and ABI stability within a released ROS Distribution

Reviewer 3: I'm assuming that @gavanderhoorn is referencing something like this tool: https://lvc.github.io/abi-compliance-checker/

It could be up to package maintainers to opt-in to using an API/ABI reporting tool, or there could be a common tool hooked to some part of the release process (like bloom).

>   * Must have a policy that keeps API and ABI stability within a released ROS Distribution

Author: Just to follow up on this, I feel like this is part of "how" not "what", so it should go in the developer guide, since others might want to use different tools to achieve the same thing and this is something that is likely to change over time (new tool, different advice) and so putting it in something that can be more easily changed than a REP is desirable.

  * [ROS Core] will use ``semver``, will maintain API and ABI stability according to ``semver`` and will be ABI (and therefore API) stable within a ROS distribution

* Change Control Process:

  * Must have all code changes occur through a change request (e.g. pull request, merge request, etc.)
  * Must have peer review policy for all change requests (e.g. require one or more reviewer)
  * Must have Continuous Integration (CI) policy for all change requests

>   * Must have documentation policy for all change requests

Author: I think it should not require anything specific. Projects may wish to do documentation updates each release instead of each change, accumulating the needed changes in a list instead or something.

For the ROS Core packages, I would say we should require them be made at each change (unless there's a reason to wait for an imminent next pull request).

      * Must achieve a line coverage above 95%
      * May pick a lower percentage target with justification, but must document it prominently
      * May provide branch coverage
      * May exclude code from coverage (test code, debug code, etc.)
      * Must require coverage to increase or stay the same before merging a change, but...
      * May accept a change that decreases coverage with proper justification (e.g. deleting code that was previously covered can cause the percentage to drop)

  * Performance:

    * Must have performance tests (exceptions allowed if they don't make sense to have)
    * Must have a performance regression policy (i.e. blocking either changes or releases on unexpected performance regressions)
    * [ROS Core]:

      * May have performance tests, strongly recommended, but for some packages it doesn't make sense
      * If there are performance tests, must choose to either check each change or before each release or both
      * If there are performance tests, must require justification for merging a change or making a release that lowers performance

  * Linters and Static Analysis

    * Must have a code style and enforce it.

>     * Must use static analysis tools where applicable.

Reviewer 7: How about considering the static analysis results as part of the quality qualification? (If it's somewhere here I missed it). E.g., `cppcheck` and other static analysis report on the severity of the bugs. Would it make sense to consider bugs above certain severity as a requirement for qualifying for this level? If so, what're the requirements for belonging to other levels, e.g. `Quality Level 2`? I'm happy to make a proposal myself if this is of interest but I'd like to check before puting time on it.

Author: My thought was you have to pass all the checks... But I guess level 2 or 3 could be that you're running them, but ignoring some failures. This really depends on what the tools are measuring and whether or not there are false positives. Unlike coverage or performance (where the things being measured are relatively universal across languages and tools), static analysis and linting are much more varied, so I think it will be hard to put a quantitative requirement here, other than 100% compliance or no compliance requirement.

Reviewer 7: Based on the (I believe positive) reactions, I've invested a bit of additional time on this and put together some more specific suggestions. Proposals are <ins>underlined</ins>. Find below a few additional comments and ideas that @wjwwood and others in position to integrate may want to consider for this "Package Quality Categories":

##### use of `cppcheck` for quality qualification: 
`cppcheck` output can be used to determine bugs that may affect the overall quality of the software. See below an example of how `cppcheck` is used over the `rclcpp` ROS 2 package:

<details><summary>cppcheck output of rclcpp ROS 2 package</summary>

```bash
cppcheck --force --enable=all . --output-file=cppcheck_output
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/any_executable.cpp ...
1/118 files checked 0% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/callback_group.cpp ...
2/118 files checked 1% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/client.cpp ...
3/118 files checked 2% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/clock.cpp ...
4/118 files checked 3% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/context.cpp ...
5/118 files checked 4% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/contexts/default_context.cpp ...
6/118 files checked 5% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/detail/rmw_implementation_specific_payload.cpp ...
7/118 files checked 5% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/detail/rmw_implementation_specific_publisher_payload.cpp ...
8/118 files checked 6% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/detail/rmw_implementation_specific_subscription_payload.cpp ...
9/118 files checked 7% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/duration.cpp ...
10/118 files checked 8% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/event.cpp ...
11/118 files checked 9% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/exceptions.cpp ...
12/118 files checked 10% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/executor.cpp ...
13/118 files checked 11% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/executors.cpp ...
14/118 files checked 11% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/executors/multi_threaded_executor.cpp ...
15/118 files checked 12% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/executors/single_threaded_executor.cpp ...
16/118 files checked 13% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/expand_topic_or_service_name.cpp ...
17/118 files checked 14% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/graph_listener.cpp ...
18/118 files checked 15% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/init_options.cpp ...
19/118 files checked 16% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/intra_process_manager.cpp ...
20/118 files checked 16% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/logger.cpp ...
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/logger.cpp: RCLCPP_LOGGING_ENABLED...
21/118 files checked 17% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/memory_strategies.cpp ...
22/118 files checked 18% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/memory_strategy.cpp ...
23/118 files checked 19% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node.cpp ...
24/118 files checked 20% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_base.cpp ...
25/118 files checked 21% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_clock.cpp ...
26/118 files checked 22% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_graph.cpp ...
27/118 files checked 22% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_logging.cpp ...
28/118 files checked 23% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_parameters.cpp ...
29/118 files checked 24% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_services.cpp ...
30/118 files checked 25% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_time_source.cpp ...
31/118 files checked 26% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_timers.cpp ...
32/118 files checked 27% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_topics.cpp ...
33/118 files checked 27% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_waitables.cpp ...
34/118 files checked 28% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node_options.cpp ...
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node_options.cpp: _WIN32...
35/118 files checked 29% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/parameter.cpp ...
36/118 files checked 30% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/parameter_client.cpp ...
37/118 files checked 31% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/parameter_events_filter.cpp ...
38/118 files checked 32% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/parameter_map.cpp ...
39/118 files checked 33% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/parameter_service.cpp ...
40/118 files checked 33% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/parameter_value.cpp ...
41/118 files checked 34% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/publisher_base.cpp ...
42/118 files checked 35% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/qos.cpp ...
43/118 files checked 36% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/qos_event.cpp ...
44/118 files checked 37% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/service.cpp ...
45/118 files checked 38% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/signal_handler.cpp ...
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/signal_handler.cpp: ANDROID;_GNU_SOURCE...
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/signal_handler.cpp: RCLCPP_HAS_SIGACTION...
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/signal_handler.cpp: _WIN32...
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/signal_handler.cpp: __APPLE__...
46/118 files checked 38% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/subscription_base.cpp ...
47/118 files checked 39% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/subscription_intra_process_base.cpp ...
48/118 files checked 40% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/time.cpp ...
49/118 files checked 41% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/time_source.cpp ...
50/118 files checked 42% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/timer.cpp ...
51/118 files checked 43% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/type_support.cpp ...
52/118 files checked 44% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/utilities.cpp ...
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/utilities.cpp: _WIN32...
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/utilities.cpp: __APPLE__...
53/118 files checked 44% done
Checking rclcpp/src/rclcpp/waitable.cpp ...
54/118 files checked 45% done
Checking rclcpp/test/executors/test_multi_threaded_executor.cpp ...
Checking rclcpp/test/executors/test_multi_threaded_executor.cpp: __linux__...
55/118 files checked 46% done
Checking rclcpp/test/node_interfaces/test_does_not_compile/get_node_topics_interface_const_ptr_rclcpp_node.cpp ...
56/118 files checked 47% done
Checking rclcpp/test/node_interfaces/test_does_not_compile/get_node_topics_interface_const_ptr_wrapped_node.cpp ...
57/118 files checked 48% done
Checking rclcpp/test/node_interfaces/test_does_not_compile/get_node_topics_interface_const_ref_rclcpp_node.cpp ...
58/118 files checked 49% done
Checking rclcpp/test/node_interfaces/test_does_not_compile/get_node_topics_interface_const_ref_wrapped_node.cpp ...
59/118 files checked 50% done
Checking rclcpp/test/node_interfaces/test_get_node_interfaces.cpp ...
60/118 files checked 50% done
Checking rclcpp/test/test_client.cpp ...
61/118 files checked 51% done
Checking rclcpp/test/test_create_timer.cpp ...
62/118 files checked 52% done
Checking rclcpp/test/test_duration.cpp ...
63/118 files checked 53% done
Checking rclcpp/test/test_executor.cpp ...
64/118 files checked 54% done
Checking rclcpp/test/test_expand_topic_or_service_name.cpp ...
65/118 files checked 55% done
Checking rclcpp/test/test_externally_defined_services.cpp ...
66/118 files checked 55% done
Checking rclcpp/test/test_find_weak_nodes.cpp ...
67/118 files checked 56% done
Checking rclcpp/test/test_function_traits.cpp ...
68/118 files checked 57% done
Checking rclcpp/test/test_init.cpp ...
69/118 files checked 58% done
Checking rclcpp/test/test_intra_process_buffer.cpp ...
70/118 files checked 59% done
Checking rclcpp/test/test_intra_process_manager.cpp ...
71/118 files checked 60% done
Checking rclcpp/test/test_loaned_message.cpp ...
72/118 files checked 61% done
Checking rclcpp/test/test_logger.cpp ...
73/118 files checked 61% done
Checking rclcpp/test/test_logging.cpp ...
74/118 files checked 62% done
Checking rclcpp/test/test_node.cpp ...
75/118 files checked 63% done
Checking rclcpp/test/test_node_global_args.cpp ...
76/118 files checked 64% done
Checking rclcpp/test/test_node_options.cpp ...
77/118 files checked 65% done
Checking rclcpp/test/test_parameter.cpp ...
78/118 files checked 66% done
Checking rclcpp/test/test_parameter_client.cpp ...
79/118 files checked 66% done
Checking rclcpp/test/test_parameter_events_filter.cpp ...
80/118 files checked 67% done
Checking rclcpp/test/test_parameter_map.cpp ...
81/118 files checked 68% done
Checking rclcpp/test/test_publisher.cpp ...
82/118 files checked 69% done
Checking rclcpp/test/test_publisher_subscription_count_api.cpp ...
83/118 files checked 70% done
Checking rclcpp/test/test_rate.cpp ...
84/118 files checked 71% done
Checking rclcpp/test/test_ring_buffer_implementation.cpp ...
85/118 files checked 72% done
Checking rclcpp/test/test_serialized_message_allocator.cpp ...
86/118 files checked 72% done
Checking rclcpp/test/test_service.cpp ...
87/118 files checked 73% done
Checking rclcpp/test/test_subscription.cpp ...
88/118 files checked 74% done
Checking rclcpp/test/test_subscription_publisher_count_api.cpp ...
89/118 files checked 75% done
Checking rclcpp/test/test_subscription_traits.cpp ...
90/118 files checked 76% done
Checking rclcpp/test/test_time.cpp ...
91/118 files checked 77% done
Checking rclcpp/test/test_time_source.cpp ...
92/118 files checked 77% done
Checking rclcpp/test/test_timer.cpp ...
93/118 files checked 78% done
Checking rclcpp/test/test_utilities.cpp ...
94/118 files checked 79% done
Checking rclcpp_action/src/client.cpp ...
95/118 files checked 80% done
Checking rclcpp_action/src/qos.cpp ...
96/118 files checked 81% done
Checking rclcpp_action/src/server.cpp ...
97/118 files checked 82% done
Checking rclcpp_action/src/server_goal_handle.cpp ...
98/118 files checked 83% done
Checking rclcpp_action/src/types.cpp ...
99/118 files checked 83% done
Checking rclcpp_action/test/test_client.cpp ...
100/118 files checked 84% done
Checking rclcpp_action/test/test_server.cpp ...
101/118 files checked 85% done
Checking rclcpp_action/test/test_traits.cpp ...
102/118 files checked 86% done
Checking rclcpp_components/src/component_container.cpp ...
103/118 files checked 87% done
Checking rclcpp_components/src/component_container_mt.cpp ...
104/118 files checked 88% done
Checking rclcpp_components/src/component_manager.cpp ...
105/118 files checked 88% done
Checking rclcpp_components/test/components/test_component.cpp ...
106/118 files checked 89% done
Checking rclcpp_components/test/test_component_manager.cpp ...
107/118 files checked 90% done
Checking rclcpp_components/test/test_component_manager_api.cpp ...
108/118 files checked 91% done
Checking rclcpp_lifecycle/src/lifecycle_node.cpp ...
109/118 files checked 92% done
Checking rclcpp_lifecycle/src/node_interfaces/lifecycle_node_interface.cpp ...
110/118 files checked 93% done
Checking rclcpp_lifecycle/src/state.cpp ...
111/118 files checked 94% done
Checking rclcpp_lifecycle/src/transition.cpp ...
112/118 files checked 94% done
Checking rclcpp_lifecycle/test/test_callback_exceptions.cpp ...
113/118 files checked 95% done
Checking rclcpp_lifecycle/test/test_lifecycle_node.cpp ...
114/118 files checked 96% done
Checking rclcpp_lifecycle/test/test_register_custom_callbacks.cpp ...
115/118 files checked 97% done
Checking rclcpp_lifecycle/test/test_state_machine_info.cpp ...
116/118 files checked 98% done
Checking rclcpp_lifecycle/test/test_state_wrapper.cpp ...
117/118 files checked 99% done
Checking rclcpp_lifecycle/test/test_transition_wrapper.cpp ...
118/118 files checked 100% done
root@robot:/opt/eloquent_ws/src/ros2/rclcpp# cat cppcheck_output
[rclcpp/src/rclcpp/executor.cpp:566] -> [rclcpp/src/rclcpp/executor.cpp:569]: (style) Variable 'success' is reassigned a value before the old one has been used.
[rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node_options.cpp:50]: (warning) Assignment of function parameter has no effect outside the function. Did you forget dereferencing it?
[rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node_options.cpp:316] -> [rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node_options.cpp:319]: (style) Variable 'ros_domain_id' is reassigned a value before the old one has been used.
[rclcpp/test/test_intra_process_manager.cpp:148]: (warning) Member variable 'IntraProcessBuffer::message_ptr' is not initialized in the constructor.
[rclcpp/test/test_subscription.cpp:55]: (performance) Function parameter 'description' should be passed by reference.
[rclcpp/test/test_subscription_traits.cpp:33]: (performance) Function parameter 'unused' should be passed by reference.
[rclcpp/test/test_subscription_traits.cpp:43]: (performance) Function parameter 'unused' should be passed by reference.
[rclcpp/test/test_time_source.cpp:129]: (performance) Function parameter 'clock' should be passed by reference.
[rclcpp_action/test/test_client.cpp:333]: (style) Variable 'goal_response_received' is assigned a value that is never used.
[rclcpp_action/test/test_client.cpp:368]: (style) Variable 'feedback_count' is modified but its new value is never used.
[rclcpp_action/test/test_client.cpp:403]: (style) Variable 'result_callback_received' is assigned a value that is never used.
[rclcpp_action/test/test_client.cpp:445]: (style) Variable 'result_callback_received' is assigned a value that is never used.
[rclcpp_action/test/test_client.cpp:497]: (style) Variable 'cancel_response_received' is assigned a value that is never used.
[rclcpp_components/src/component_manager.hpp:59]: (style) Class 'ComponentManager' has a constructor with 1 argument that is not explicit.
[rclcpp_components/src/component_manager.hpp:74]: (performance) Function parameter 'request_header' should be passed by reference.
[rclcpp_components/src/component_manager.hpp:75]: (performance) Function parameter 'request' should be passed by reference.
[rclcpp_components/src/component_manager.hpp:80]: (performance) Function parameter 'request_header' should be passed by reference.
[rclcpp_components/src/component_manager.hpp:81]: (performance) Function parameter 'request' should be passed by reference.
[rclcpp_components/src/component_manager.hpp:86]: (performance) Function parameter 'request_header' should be passed by reference.
[rclcpp_components/src/component_manager.hpp:87]: (performance) Function parameter 'request' should be passed by reference.
[rclcpp_components/src/component_manager.cpp:121]: (performance) Function parameter 'request_header' should be passed by reference.
[rclcpp_components/src/component_manager.cpp:122]: (performance) Function parameter 'request' should be passed by reference.
[rclcpp_components/src/component_manager.cpp:224]: (performance) Function parameter 'request_header' should be passed by reference.
[rclcpp_components/src/component_manager.cpp:225]: (performance) Function parameter 'request' should be passed by reference.
[rclcpp_components/src/component_manager.cpp:249]: (performance) Function parameter 'request_header' should be passed by reference.
[rclcpp_components/src/component_manager.cpp:250]: (performance) Function parameter 'request' should be passed by reference.
[rclcpp_lifecycle/src/lifecycle_node_interface_impl.hpp:58]: (performance) Function parameter 'node_base_interface' should be passed by reference.
[rclcpp_lifecycle/src/lifecycle_node_interface_impl.hpp:59]: (performance) Function parameter 'node_services_interface' should be passed by reference.
[rclcpp_lifecycle/src/lifecycle_node_interface_impl.hpp:201]: (performance) Function parameter 'header' should be passed by reference.
[rclcpp_lifecycle/src/lifecycle_node_interface_impl.hpp:202]: (performance) Function parameter 'req' should be passed by reference.
[rclcpp_lifecycle/src/lifecycle_node_interface_impl.hpp:242]: (performance) Function parameter 'header' should be passed by reference.
[rclcpp_lifecycle/src/lifecycle_node_interface_impl.hpp:243]: (performance) Function parameter 'req' should be passed by reference.
[rclcpp_lifecycle/src/lifecycle_node_interface_impl.hpp:258]: (performance) Function parameter 'header' should be passed by reference.
[rclcpp_lifecycle/src/lifecycle_node_interface_impl.hpp:259]: (performance) Function parameter 'req' should be passed by reference.
[rclcpp_lifecycle/src/lifecycle_node_interface_impl.hpp:278]: (performance) Function parameter 'header' should be passed by reference.
[rclcpp_lifecycle/src/lifecycle_node_interface_impl.hpp:279]: (performance) Function parameter 'req' should be passed by reference.
[rclcpp_lifecycle/src/lifecycle_node_interface_impl.hpp:304]: (performance) Function parameter 'header' should be passed by reference.
[rclcpp_lifecycle/src/lifecycle_node_interface_impl.hpp:305]: (performance) Function parameter 'req' should be passed by reference.
[rclcpp_lifecycle/test/test_callback_exceptions.cpp:42]: (performance) Function parameter 'node_name' should be passed by reference.
[rclcpp_lifecycle/test/test_callback_exceptions.cpp:88]: (performance) Function parameter 'node_name' should be passed by reference.
[rclcpp_lifecycle/test/test_lifecycle_node.cpp:42]: (performance) Function parameter 'node_name' should be passed by reference.
[rclcpp_lifecycle/test/test_lifecycle_node.cpp:66]: (performance) Function parameter 'node_name' should be passed by reference.
[rclcpp_lifecycle/test/test_register_custom_callbacks.cpp:42]: (performance) Function parameter 'node_name' should be passed by reference.
[rclcpp_lifecycle/test/test_state_wrapper.cpp:42]: (style) Variable 'state_name' is assigned a value that is never used.
[rclcpp_lifecycle/test/test_transition_wrapper.cpp:46]: (style) Variable 'transition_name' is assigned a value that is never used.
[rclcpp/test/test_client.cpp:33]: (style) The function 'SetUp' is never used.
[rclcpp/test/executors/test_multi_threaded_executor.cpp:35]: (style) The function 'SetUpTestCase' is never used.
[rclcpp/test/test_client.cpp:38]: (style) The function 'TearDown' is never used.
[rclcpp/test/node_interfaces/test_get_node_interfaces.cpp:37]: (style) The function 'TearDownTestCase' is never used.
[rclcpp/src/rclcpp/utilities.cpp:177]: (style) The function 'get_c_string' is never used.
[rclcpp/src/rclcpp/time.cpp:247]: (style) The function 'operator+' is never used.
[rclcpp/test/test_publisher.cpp:58]: (style) The function 'operator<<' is never used.
[rclcpp/test/test_intra_process_manager.cpp:232]: (style) The function 'provide_intra_process_message' is never used.
[rclcpp/src/rclcpp/utilities.cpp:46]: (style) The function 'signal_handlers_installed' is never used.
(information) Cppcheck cannot find all the include files (use --check-config for details)
```
</details>

The output of `cppcheck` provides information about the *(severity)* of each reported (potential) flaw. While *style* ones might be disregarded, one could argue that (e.g.) <ins>a Level 1 ROS 2 quality package needs to have no (unless accepted as such) warning or error coming out of cppcheck</ins>. Another alternative is to split enforcement of the `cppcheck` output across levels and assign (warnings) acceptable within Level 2, but not within Level 1.

##### use of `flawfinder` for quality qualification: 
With a similar rationale, `flawfinder` can help identify flaws. See below for the output of `flawfinder` on the same ROS 2 package:

<details><summary>flawfinder output of rclcpp ROS 2 package</summary>

```bash
root@robot:/opt/eloquent_ws/src/ros2/rclcpp# flawfinder .
Flawfinder version 2.0.10, (C) 2001-2019 David A. Wheeler.
Number of rules (primarily dangerous function names) in C/C++ ruleset: 223
Warning: Skipping directory with initial dot ./.git
Examining ./rclcpp_lifecycle/include/rclcpp_lifecycle/lifecycle_node.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp_lifecycle/include/rclcpp_lifecycle/lifecycle_publisher.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp_lifecycle/include/rclcpp_lifecycle/node_interfaces/lifecycle_node_interface.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp_lifecycle/include/rclcpp_lifecycle/transition.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp_lifecycle/include/rclcpp_lifecycle/state.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp_lifecycle/include/rclcpp_lifecycle/lifecycle_node_impl.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp_lifecycle/include/rclcpp_lifecycle/visibility_control.h
Examining ./rclcpp_lifecycle/include/rclcpp_lifecycle/type_traits/is_manageable_node.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp_lifecycle/src/state.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp_lifecycle/src/lifecycle_node_interface_impl.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp_lifecycle/src/node_interfaces/lifecycle_node_interface.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp_lifecycle/src/lifecycle_node.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp_lifecycle/src/transition.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp_lifecycle/test/test_state_wrapper.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp_lifecycle/test/test_callback_exceptions.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp_lifecycle/test/test_state_machine_info.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp_lifecycle/test/test_lifecycle_node.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp_lifecycle/test/test_register_custom_callbacks.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp_lifecycle/test/test_transition_wrapper.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp_action/include/rclcpp_action/client_goal_handle.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp_action/include/rclcpp_action/create_server.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp_action/include/rclcpp_action/exceptions.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp_action/include/rclcpp_action/types.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp_action/include/rclcpp_action/server_goal_handle.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp_action/include/rclcpp_action/visibility_control.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp_action/include/rclcpp_action/qos.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp_action/include/rclcpp_action/rclcpp_action.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp_action/include/rclcpp_action/server.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp_action/include/rclcpp_action/client_goal_handle_impl.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp_action/include/rclcpp_action/create_client.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp_action/include/rclcpp_action/client.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp_action/src/qos.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp_action/src/server.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp_action/src/server_goal_handle.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp_action/src/client.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp_action/src/types.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp_action/test/test_traits.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp_action/test/test_server.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp_action/test/test_client.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp_components/include/rclcpp_components/node_factory_template.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp_components/include/rclcpp_components/register_node_macro.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp_components/include/rclcpp_components/node_instance_wrapper.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp_components/include/rclcpp_components/node_factory.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp_components/src/component_manager.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp_components/src/component_container.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp_components/src/component_container_mt.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp_components/src/component_manager.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp_components/test/test_component_manager.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp_components/test/test_component_manager_api.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp_components/test/components/test_component.cpp
Warning: Skipping directory with initial dot ./.github
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/any_executable.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/parameter_client.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/time.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/macros.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/expand_topic_or_service_name.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/node_impl.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/create_publisher.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/parameter_service.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/function_traits.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/executor.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/contexts/default_context.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/parameter.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/waitable.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/node.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/parameter_events_filter.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/executors.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/duration.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/any_service_callback.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/strategies/message_pool_memory_strategy.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/strategies/allocator_memory_strategy.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/any_subscription_callback.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/qos_event.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/detail/resolve_use_intra_process.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/detail/rmw_implementation_specific_publisher_payload.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/detail/rmw_implementation_specific_subscription_payload.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/detail/rmw_implementation_specific_payload.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/detail/resolve_intra_process_buffer_type.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/intra_process_buffer_type.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/context.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/exceptions.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_base.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_timers_interface.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_services.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_clock_interface.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_services_interface.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_topics.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_time_source_interface.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_graph.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_time_source.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_base_interface.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/node_interfaces/get_node_topics_interface.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_graph_interface.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_waitables_interface.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/node_interfaces/get_node_base_interface.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/node_interfaces/get_node_timers_interface.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_parameters.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_parameters_interface.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_logging_interface.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_topics_interface.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_logging.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_timers.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_clock.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_waitables.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/experimental/intra_process_manager.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/experimental/create_intra_process_buffer.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/experimental/subscription_intra_process_base.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/experimental/subscription_intra_process.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/experimental/buffers/ring_buffer_implementation.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/experimental/buffers/buffer_implementation_base.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/experimental/buffers/intra_process_buffer.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/publisher.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/intra_process_setting.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/create_subscription.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/init_options.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/node_options.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/graph_listener.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/memory_strategy.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/publisher_factory.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/parameter_value.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/subscription_base.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/time_source.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/parameter_map.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/visibility_control.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/qos.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/clock.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/subscription_traits.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/subscription_factory.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/create_service.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/memory_strategies.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/event.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/subscription_options.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/message_memory_strategy.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/create_timer.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/timer.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/scope_exit.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/rate.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/logger.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/allocator/allocator_common.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/allocator/allocator_deleter.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/create_client.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/callback_group.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/service.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/loaned_message.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/subscription.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/rclcpp.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/utilities.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/executors/single_threaded_executor.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/executors/multi_threaded_executor.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/publisher_base.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/publisher_options.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/type_support_decl.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/include/rclcpp/client.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/subscription_base.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/parameter_value.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/contexts/default_context.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/signal_handler.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/exceptions.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/parameter_client.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/parameter_events_filter.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/parameter_map.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/init_options.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/any_executable.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/detail/rmw_implementation_specific_payload.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/detail/rmw_implementation_specific_publisher_payload.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/detail/rmw_implementation_specific_subscription_payload.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/parameter_service_names.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/time_source.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/expand_topic_or_service_name.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/memory_strategies.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_base.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_parameters.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_topics.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_time_source.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_clock.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_graph.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_logging.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_timers.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_waitables.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_services.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/clock.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/context.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/qos_event.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/duration.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/utilities.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node_options.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/graph_listener.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/parameter_service.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/intra_process_manager.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/executors.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/qos.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/executor.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/memory_strategy.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/logger.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/waitable.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/callback_group.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/service.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/type_support.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/subscription_intra_process_base.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/parameter.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/client.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/event.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/signal_handler.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/timer.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/time.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/executors/multi_threaded_executor.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/executors/single_threaded_executor.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/publisher_base.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/test_subscription_traits.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/test_expand_topic_or_service_name.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/test_serialized_message_allocator.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/test_subscription.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/test_publisher_subscription_count_api.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/test_function_traits.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/test_find_weak_nodes.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/test_subscription_publisher_count_api.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/test_duration.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/test_time_source.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/test_node.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/node_interfaces/node_wrapper.hpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/node_interfaces/test_get_node_interfaces.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/node_interfaces/test_does_not_compile/get_node_topics_interface_const_ref_rclcpp_node.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/node_interfaces/test_does_not_compile/get_node_topics_interface_const_ptr_wrapped_node.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/node_interfaces/test_does_not_compile/get_node_topics_interface_const_ref_wrapped_node.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/node_interfaces/test_does_not_compile/get_node_topics_interface_const_ptr_rclcpp_node.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/test_node_global_args.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/test_parameter_client.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/test_loaned_message.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/test_logger.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/test_parameter_map.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/test_timer.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/test_create_timer.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/test_executor.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/test_ring_buffer_implementation.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/test_externally_defined_services.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/test_logging.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/test_time.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/test_parameter.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/test_node_options.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/test_intra_process_buffer.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/test_service.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/test_utilities.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/test_init.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/test_rate.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/test_parameter_events_filter.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/test_intra_process_manager.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/executors/test_multi_threaded_executor.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/test_client.cpp
Examining ./rclcpp/test/test_publisher.cpp

FINAL RESULTS:

./rclcpp/test/test_logging.cpp:64:  [4] (format) vsnprintf:
  If format strings can be influenced by an attacker, they can be exploited,
  and note that sprintf variations do not always \0-terminate (CWE-134). Use
  a constant for the format specification.
./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node_options.cpp:319:  [3] (buffer) getenv:
  Environment variables are untrustable input if they can be set by an
  attacker. They can have any content and length, and the same variable can
  be set more than once (CWE-807, CWE-20). Check environment variables
  carefully before using them.
./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node_options.cpp:102:  [2] (buffer) char:
  Statically-sized arrays can be improperly restricted, leading to potential
  overflows or other issues (CWE-119!/CWE-120). Perform bounds checking, use
  functions that limit length, or ensure that the size is larger than the
  maximum possible length.
./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/signal_handler.cpp:199:  [2] (buffer) char:
  Statically-sized arrays can be improperly restricted, leading to potential
  overflows or other issues (CWE-119!/CWE-120). Perform bounds checking, use
  functions that limit length, or ensure that the size is larger than the
  maximum possible length.
./rclcpp/test/test_logging.cpp:63:  [2] (buffer) char:
  Statically-sized arrays can be improperly restricted, leading to potential
  overflows or other issues (CWE-119!/CWE-120). Perform bounds checking, use
  functions that limit length, or ensure that the size is larger than the
  maximum possible length.
./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/signal_handler.cpp:172:  [1] (buffer) strncpy:
  Easily used incorrectly; doesn't always \0-terminate or check for invalid
  pointers [MS-banned] (CWE-120).
./rclcpp/test/test_parameter.cpp:472:  [1] (buffer) mismatch:
  Function does not check the second iterator for over-read conditions
  (CWE-126). This function is often discouraged by most C++ coding standards
  in favor of its safer alternatives provided since C++14. Consider using a
  form of this function that checks the second iterator before potentially
  overflowing it.
./rclcpp/test/test_parameter.cpp:477:  [1] (buffer) mismatch:
  Function does not check the second iterator for over-read conditions
  (CWE-126). This function is often discouraged by most C++ coding standards
  in favor of its safer alternatives provided since C++14. Consider using a
  form of this function that checks the second iterator before potentially
  overflowing it.
./rclcpp/test/test_parameter.cpp:482:  [1] (buffer) mismatch:
  Function does not check the second iterator for over-read conditions
  (CWE-126). This function is often discouraged by most C++ coding standards
  in favor of its safer alternatives provided since C++14. Consider using a
  form of this function that checks the second iterator before potentially
  overflowing it.
./rclcpp/test/test_parameter.cpp:506:  [1] (buffer) mismatch:
  Function does not check the second iterator for over-read conditions
  (CWE-126). This function is often discouraged by most C++ coding standards
  in favor of its safer alternatives provided since C++14. Consider using a
  form of this function that checks the second iterator before potentially
  overflowing it.
./rclcpp/test/test_parameter.cpp:518:  [1] (buffer) mismatch:
  Function does not check the second iterator for over-read conditions
  (CWE-126). This function is often discouraged by most C++ coding standards
  in favor of its safer alternatives provided since C++14. Consider using a
  form of this function that checks the second iterator before potentially
  overflowing it.
./rclcpp/test/test_parameter.cpp:523:  [1] (buffer) mismatch:
  Function does not check the second iterator for over-read conditions
  (CWE-126). This function is often discouraged by most C++ coding standards
  in favor of its safer alternatives provided since C++14. Consider using a
  form of this function that checks the second iterator before potentially
  overflowing it.
./rclcpp/test/test_parameter.cpp:605:  [1] (buffer) mismatch:
  Function does not check the second iterator for over-read conditions
  (CWE-126). This function is often discouraged by most C++ coding standards
  in favor of its safer alternatives provided since C++14. Consider using a
  form of this function that checks the second iterator before potentially
  overflowing it.
./rclcpp/test/test_parameter.cpp:610:  [1] (buffer) mismatch:
  Function does not check the second iterator for over-read conditions
  (CWE-126). This function is often discouraged by most C++ coding standards
  in favor of its safer alternatives provided since C++14. Consider using a
  form of this function that checks the second iterator before potentially
  overflowing it.
./rclcpp/test/test_parameter.cpp:615:  [1] (buffer) mismatch:
  Function does not check the second iterator for over-read conditions
  (CWE-126). This function is often discouraged by most C++ coding standards
  in favor of its safer alternatives provided since C++14. Consider using a
  form of this function that checks the second iterator before potentially
  overflowing it.
./rclcpp/test/test_parameter.cpp:639:  [1] (buffer) mismatch:
  Function does not check the second iterator for over-read conditions
  (CWE-126). This function is often discouraged by most C++ coding standards
  in favor of its safer alternatives provided since C++14. Consider using a
  form of this function that checks the second iterator before potentially
  overflowing it.
./rclcpp/test/test_parameter.cpp:651:  [1] (buffer) mismatch:
  Function does not check the second iterator for over-read conditions
  (CWE-126). This function is often discouraged by most C++ coding standards
  in favor of its safer alternatives provided since C++14. Consider using a
  form of this function that checks the second iterator before potentially
  overflowing it.
./rclcpp/test/test_parameter.cpp:656:  [1] (buffer) mismatch:
  Function does not check the second iterator for over-read conditions
  (CWE-126). This function is often discouraged by most C++ coding standards
  in favor of its safer alternatives provided since C++14. Consider using a
  form of this function that checks the second iterator before potentially
  overflowing it.

ANALYSIS SUMMARY:

Hits = 18
Lines analyzed = 45121 in approximately 1.31 seconds (34388 lines/second)
Physical Source Lines of Code (SLOC) = 30880
Hits@level = [0]   4 [1]  13 [2]   3 [3]   1 [4]   1 [5]   0
Hits@level+ = [0+]  22 [1+]  18 [2+]   5 [3+]   2 [4+]   1 [5+]   0
Hits/KSLOC@level+ = [0+] 0.712435 [1+] 0.582902 [2+] 0.161917 [3+] 0.0647668 [4+] 0.0323834 [5+]   0
Dot directories skipped = 2 (--followdotdir overrides)
Minimum risk level = 1
Not every hit is necessarily a security vulnerability.
There may be other security vulnerabilities; review your code!
See 'Secure Programming HOWTO'
(https://dwheeler.com/secure-programs) for more information.
```
</details>

`flawfinder` represents the severity of its reports with a number that goes from [0] to [5]. This maps rather nice (IMHO) to the Levels proposed so far by @wjwwood and others (in a reverse manner). In other words a proposal here would be that <ins>package quality Level 1 of ROS 2  requires that the output of `flawfinder` shows no flaw with a severity above [4]. Similarly, package quality Level 2 of ROS 2 requires that the output of `flawfinder` shows no flaw with a severity above [3]</ins> and so on.

##### use of `RATS` for quality qualification: 
RATS stands for rough auditing tool for security. In this case, not intended for security but for quality, RATS can (similarly to other tools discussed above) add value for quality qualification. The rationale for introducing RATS in here comes from the fact that quality is often viewed as a precondition to safety, and safety is connected to security in a direct manner. Refer to ISO/IEC TS 17961:2013 which indicates that "in practice, security-critical and safety-critical code have the same requirements". The output of RATS over `rclcpp` is below:

<details><summary>RATS output of rclcpp ROS 2 package</summary>

```bash
root@robot:/opt/eloquent_ws/src/ros2/rclcpp# rats .
Entries in perl database: 33
Entries in ruby database: 46
Entries in python database: 62
Entries in c database: 334
Entries in php database: 55
Analyzing ./rclcpp_lifecycle/src/state.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp_lifecycle/src/node_interfaces/lifecycle_node_interface.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp_lifecycle/src/lifecycle_node.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp_lifecycle/src/transition.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp_lifecycle/test/test_state_wrapper.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp_lifecycle/test/test_callback_exceptions.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp_lifecycle/test/test_state_machine_info.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp_lifecycle/test/test_lifecycle_node.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp_lifecycle/test/test_register_custom_callbacks.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp_lifecycle/test/test_transition_wrapper.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp_action/src/qos.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp_action/src/server.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp_action/src/server_goal_handle.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp_action/src/client.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp_action/src/types.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp_action/test/test_traits.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp_action/test/test_server.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp_action/test/test_client.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp_components/src/component_container.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp_components/src/component_container_mt.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp_components/src/component_manager.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp_components/test/test_component_manager.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp_components/test/test_component_manager_api.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp_components/test/components/test_component.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/subscription_base.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/parameter_value.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/contexts/default_context.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/exceptions.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/parameter_client.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/parameter_events_filter.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/parameter_map.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/init_options.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/any_executable.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/detail/rmw_implementation_specific_payload.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/detail/rmw_implementation_specific_publisher_payload.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/detail/rmw_implementation_specific_subscription_payload.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/time_source.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/expand_topic_or_service_name.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/memory_strategies.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_base.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_parameters.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_topics.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_time_source.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_clock.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_graph.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_logging.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_timers.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_waitables.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node_interfaces/node_services.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/clock.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/context.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/qos_event.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/duration.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/utilities.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node_options.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/graph_listener.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/parameter_service.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/intra_process_manager.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/executors.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/qos.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/executor.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/memory_strategy.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/logger.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/waitable.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/callback_group.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/service.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/type_support.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/subscription_intra_process_base.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/parameter.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/client.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/event.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/signal_handler.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/timer.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/time.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/executors/multi_threaded_executor.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/executors/single_threaded_executor.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/publisher_base.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/test/test_subscription_traits.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/test/test_expand_topic_or_service_name.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/test/test_serialized_message_allocator.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/test/test_subscription.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/test/test_publisher_subscription_count_api.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/test/test_function_traits.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/test/test_find_weak_nodes.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/test/test_subscription_publisher_count_api.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/test/test_duration.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/test/test_time_source.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/test/test_node.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/test/node_interfaces/test_get_node_interfaces.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/test/node_interfaces/test_does_not_compile/get_node_topics_interface_const_ref_rclcpp_node.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/test/node_interfaces/test_does_not_compile/get_node_topics_interface_const_ptr_wrapped_node.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/test/node_interfaces/test_does_not_compile/get_node_topics_interface_const_ref_wrapped_node.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/test/node_interfaces/test_does_not_compile/get_node_topics_interface_const_ptr_rclcpp_node.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/test/test_node_global_args.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/test/test_parameter_client.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/test/test_loaned_message.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/test/test_logger.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/test/test_parameter_map.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/test/test_timer.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/test/test_create_timer.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/test/test_executor.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/test/test_ring_buffer_implementation.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/test/test_externally_defined_services.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/test/test_logging.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/test/test_time.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/test/test_parameter.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/test/test_node_options.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/test/test_intra_process_buffer.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/test/test_service.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/test/test_utilities.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/test/test_init.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/test/test_rate.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/test/test_parameter_events_filter.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/test/test_intra_process_manager.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/test/executors/test_multi_threaded_executor.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/test/test_client.cpp
Analyzing ./rclcpp/test/test_publisher.cpp
./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/node_options.cpp:319: High: getenv
Environment variables are highly untrustable input. They may be of any length, and contain any data. Do not make any assumptions regarding content or length. If at all possible avoid using them, and if it is necessary, sanitize them and truncate them to a reasonable length.

./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/signal_handler.cpp:199: High: fixed size local buffer
./rclcpp/test/test_parameter_map.cpp:36: High: fixed size local buffer
./rclcpp/test/test_parameter_map.cpp:223: High: fixed size local buffer
./rclcpp/test/test_logging.cpp:63: High: fixed size local buffer
Extra care should be taken to ensure that character arrays that are allocated
on the stack are used safely.  They are prime targets for buffer overflow
attacks.

./rclcpp/src/rclcpp/signal_handler.cpp:195: Medium: signal
When setting signal handlers, do not use the same function to handle multiple signals. There exists the possibility a race condition will result if 2 or more different signals are sent to the process at nearly the same time. Also, when writing signal handlers, it is best to do as little as possible in them. The best strategy is to use the signal handler to set a flag, that another part of the program tests and performs the appropriate action(s) when it is set.
See also: http://razor.bindview.com/publish/papers/signals.txt

Total lines analyzed: 25004
Total time 0.082441 seconds
303295 lines per second
```
</details>

In this case, RATS outputs signals which can be interpreted and mapped to quality. One way to go on this is that <ins>packages of quality Level 2 or above should not have  "High" signals in `RATS`</ins>.

----

From our research, the use of these tools for static analysis is a common practice. There are other proprietary tools but all of the tools listed above are open source and open to use (each with its own license though). Note that the proposals above come together in a "disconnected" manner. They do not conform a common *formal* testing framework (at least not at this point). We could use some of them, all or none at all. From our perspective, we believe that qualifying quality via these testing tools (or maybe others) will add relevant value to the community. Not just for QA but also for security purposes (which as justified above is connected to quality and safety).

On the implementation side (it always comes down to that I guess), provided there's enough support and blessing from the people participating and Open Robotics' side, Alias could probably commit some effort to push the use of these tools to the ROS 2 build farm.

For compleness and complementary to the proposals above, MISRA C and other standards for software do provide a series of rules in a "common framework". This would be a larger undertake and we don't have the bandwidth to do it all (we could collaborate though!) but <ins>using [`codequality`](https://gitlab.com/gitlab-org/security-products/codequality) or [`statick`](https://github.com/sscpac/statick) together with custom MISRA C rules</ins> would add relevant value.

Author: @vmayoral this is a great resource!

However, I don't think it belongs in the REP. Instead I'd like to see that in the recommendation for what to use, either as part of `ament_lint_common` or the ROS developer guide.

Also, any package may use more than what is in `ament_lint_common` and mention it in their "quality declaration" as described in this REP.

Reviewer 7: @wjwwood I see your point and understand we want to limit the scope to "Quality Assurance" in here however, my recent readings made me more convinced of the inherent connection between quality, security and integrity. Tools like the ones proposed above can *help achieve an intuition* of compliance to these levels (though @gavanderhoorn speaks right, it will **not ensure** quality compliance). 

I'm ok bringing those proposals above to the ROS developer guide or to https://github.com/ament/ament_lint however, for that to make sense in this context, we'd need to add such restrictions somehow to this REP, shouldn't we? In other words, some quality levels in here should demand certain responses from those (or other) tools. I don't see that reflected in the REP currently and this concerns me at the moment.

Please see the following text I [recently shared in a security discussion](https://github.com/mikaelarguedas/rep/pull/1#discussion_r395523332) that I'm producing as part of some internal work we're conducing to further improve the devops cycle in robotics:

>Quality(Quality Assurance or QA for short) and Security are often misunderstood when it comes to software. Ivers argues [^1] that quality "essentially means that the software will execute according to its design and purpose" while "security means that the software will not put data or computing systems at risk of unauthorized access". Within [^1] one relevant question that arises is whether the quality problems are also security issues or vice versa. Ivers indicates that quality bugs can turn into security ones, provided they’re exploitable, and addresses the question by remarking that quality and security are critical components to a broader notion: software integrity.
>
>[^1]: @misc{ivers_2017, title={Security vs. Quality: What's the Difference?}, url={https://www.securityweek.com/security-vs-quality-what’s-difference}, journal={SecurityWeek}, author={Ivers, Jim}, year={2017}, month={Mar}}

    * [ROS Core]:

      * Must use ROS code style and use linters from ``ament_lint_common`` to enforce it
      * Must use all linters/static analysis that are part of ``ament_lint_common``

* Dependencies:

  * Must not have direct runtime "ROS" dependencies which are not 'Level 1' dependencies, but...
  * May have optional direct runtime "ROS" dependencies which are not 'Level 1', e.g. tracing or debugging features that can be disabled
  * Must have justification for why each direct runtime "non-ROS" dependency is equivalent to a 'Level 1' package in terms of quality

* Platform Support:

  * Must support all tier 1 platforms for ROS 2, as defined in `REP-2000 <https://www.ros.org/reps/rep-2000.html#support-tiers>`_

If the above points are satisfied then a package can be considered 'Level 1'.
Below are some details on the above points.

Version Policy
""""""""""""""

The most important thing is to have some version policy which developers may use to anticipate and understand changes to the version of the package.

> We recommend the use of ``semver`` as it covers all the important points that a version policy should cover, is well thought out, and is popular in the open source community broadly.

Author: > One possible exception perhaps to consider would be when the 'upstream' source uses a different policy and for valid reasons the ROS wrapper/release cannot/will not change that.

This. As I said above, I'd leave as-is unless someone strongly disagrees.

> We recommend the use of ``semver`` as it covers all the important points that a version policy should cover, is well thought out, and is popular in the open source community broadly.

Reviewer 4: Having thought about it more: if the REP describes criteria for when it is allowed to apply a certain quality label to ROS packages, then I don't see why we cannot simply require semver.

non-ROS dependencies are free to use anything they want already, this REP would not change that even if we require semver for ROS packages.

Public API
""""""""""

The package should also state what the public API includes, and/or state what parts of the API are excluded intentionally.

For C++, it's somewhat obvious that all installed headers are part of the public API, but it's acceptable to have parts of the accessible API not be stable.
For example, having an "experimental" namespace or a "detail" namespace which does not adhere to the API and ABI stability rules is allowed, but they must be clearly documented as such.
Changes to these excluded API's, especially something like a "detail" namespace, should still not break API or ABI for other public API's indirectly.

For Python, it's more important to explicitly declare which parts of the API is public, because all modules are typically installed and accessible to users.
One easy thing to do is to say all of the API is public and therefore API stable, but "impl" or "detail" namespaces can be used if needed, they just need to be clearly documented as not public and therefore not stable.

There are also other, non-API, things which should be considered and optionally documented as part of the "stable interface" of the package.

> This includes, but isn't limited to, message definitions, command line tools (arguments and output format), ROS names (topic, service, node, etc.), and behaviors of the applications.

Author: By optional I meant, some packages will not have these to document. If they have topics and nodes and such, then they should be documented as part of the public API, or a blanket (all topics and names are part of the API). Note this section is about declaring what is in and out of the public API and therefore affects the version number when being changed. Documenting which ones exist and what they are used for is part of documentation, which is in a different section.

> For yet other languages the details will be different, but the important thing is that the public API be obviously documented, and that the public API adheres to an API and ABI stability as described in the version policy, and that they are documented and tested.

Reviewer 3: I would suggest dropping "yet" altogether from this.

The term "feature", and the scope of the documentation, is intentionally vague because it's difficult to quantitatively measure this metric.
However, the spirit of this requirement is that, for a 'Level 1' quality package, all of the things a user might do with the package needs at least basic documentation or a snippet of code as an example on how to use it.
The `roscpp Overview <https://wiki.ros.org/roscpp/Overview>`_ from the ROS 1 wiki is a good example of this kind of documentation.

Feature Testing and Code Coverage Policy
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

This policy should aim for a "high" coverage standard, but the exact number and rules will vary depending on the package in question.
The policy may be influenced by factors like:

- what programming languages are being used, and whether or not there are multiple languages in use
- what coverage information is available (statement vs. line vs. branch vs condition/path coverage)
- what strategy is preferred for dealing with difficult to reach statements/branches

This StackOverflow question is a good summary of the issues:

> https://stackoverflow.com/questions/90002/what-is-a-reasonable-code-coverage-for-unit-tests-and-why

Author: I agree, I'll consider copying more into the REP, though I did quote/summarize some of them most important bits.

> https://stackoverflow.com/questions/90002/what-is-a-reasonable-code-coverage-for-unit-tests-and-why

Reviewer 3: I would be cautious about copying content from StackOverflow as it is under the CC-BY-SA 4.0 license, which requires it to be shared under the same license (ref: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/).

I'm not sure what the REPs are licensed as, but there could potentially be a compatibility issue.

Importantly, this answer points out that tracking and enforcing code coverage statistics is strictly empirical (rather than theoretical) and that there are different reasons for using them.
Among those reasons listed is "To satisfy stakeholders", which is the main goal of requiring a code coverage policy for these high quality packages.
It is summarized nicely:

    For many projects, there are various actors who have an interest in software quality who may not be involved in the day-to-day development of the software (managers, technical leads, etc.)
    Saying "we're going to write all the tests we really need" is not convincing:
    They either need to trust entirely, or verify with ongoing close oversight (assuming they even have the technical understanding to do so.)
    Providing measurable standards and explaining how they reasonably approximate actual goals is better.

The other two reasons "To normalize team behavior" and "To keep yourself honest" are nice reasons to have code coverage goals, but are out of scope for this document.

The general recommendation is to have at least line coverage and aim to achieve and maintain a high percentage of coverage (e.g. above 90%).

> This at least gives you and your stakeholders some confidence that all feature have basic tests.

Author: > I know it's hard to do -- and just making up numbers is not a good idea

That's why I didn't. What would you suggest instead? I don't see a good solution for a hard requirement.

> but phrasing such as "general recommendation" and "a high percentage" does not seem to align with the goal of the REP.

How so? The REP is just to set some milestones for packages to strive towards, encourage packages to claim a quality level, and document their justification for that level so consumers can judge them for themselves more easily.

I don't think prescribing a number is require for any of those things.

Part of what is missing from this REP (which is intended to be general and inclusive) are some stricter prescriptions on how to achieve these requirements, which we will have for the "ROS Core" packages (what is in and out of that set is still being worked on), they were (or will be) removed when copy-pasting from the previous pull request.

Specifically, for ROS core packages, the prescription is 95% line coverage, or lower if properly justified.

Any assurances beyond that would require branch coverage statistics and independent investigation of the tests and how they test the code.

Performance Testing
"""""""""""""""""""

There are some cases where performance testing does not make sense to have.
For example, it may be a good idea to have performance tests for a code generator (like ``rosidl_generator_cpp``), but it is not strictly required since its performance does not affect a runtime production system, and so in that case the package could claim to be 'Level 1' without performance tests if properly justified in the "quality declaration".

> However, if performance is a reasonable concern for use in a production system, then there must be performance tests and they should be used in conjunction with a regression policy which aims to prevent new versions of the package to be considerably slower without cause.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
However, if performance is a reasonable concern for use in a production system, then there must be performance tests and they should be used in conjunction with a regression policy which aims to prevent unintended performance degradation of packages.
```

> Note, the performance regression policy should not prevent regressions, but instead should aim to detect them and either address them directly, plan to address them in the future, or when unavoidable (e.g. fixing a bug required more resources to be safe) explain why the regression has occurred in the memorandum of the change request that introduced it.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Note, the performance regression policy should not prevent regressions, but instead should aim to detect them and either address them directly, plan to address them in the future, or when unavoidable explain why the regression has occurred in the memorandum of the change request that introduced it (e.g. fixing a bug required more resources to be safe).
```

Dependencies
""""""""""""

Each package should examine their direct runtime dependencies for their quality levels.
Packages should not claim a quality level higher than their dependencies, unless it can be reasonably explained why they do not affect the quality of the package in question.

> An example of this would be build or "build tool" dependencies, which are only used during build time and do not impact the runtime quality of the package.

Reviewer 4: Is this a statement we can make? It's not uncommon for quality standards to require the use of specific versions of build tools, compilers and related infrastructure.

```suggestion
An example of this would be build or "build tool" dependencies, which are only used during build time and do not affect the runtime quality of the package.
```

Author: I think this is a grey area. If we were certifying this for safety, then yes we'd look at everything that does or affects codegen (build system, compiler, etc.). But in this case I think the burden is too high.

There's an implicit assumption that a package must be built as documented (the documentation may be, built as a ROS 2 package, i.e. built with colcon on one of the tier 1 platforms based on the ROS 2 installation instructions and REP-2000), and if it is then the maintainers of the package have ensured the build does not adversely affect the quality of the package, regardless of the quality of the build tools (i.e. colcon doesn't need to be level 1 quality to produce binaries for level 1 quality packages). Again this isn't strong enough for safety certification perhaps, but I think it's good enough here and a trade-off worth making to keep the burden of proof lighter for package maintainers.

If you're referring to runtime things, like is the runtime or vm or standard library for my programing language good enough, I think this is also a grey area, but the general assumption is that this level of infrastructure (the language level) at least meet these criteria of quality here. If a user suggested otherwise, and the package maintainers were inclined to convince them otherwise, they could justify their dependency on that language in their package's "quality declaration". These dependencies are sometimes implicit at the package.xml level, i.e. we don't exec_depend on python3 or libstdc++ or anything.

> This would not include, however, build dependencies which, for example, contribute only headers to a C++ library or a static library, as the quality of those headers or static library also impact the quality of the runtime product directly.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This would not include, however, build dependencies which, for example, contribute only headers to a C++ library or a static library, as the quality of those headers or static library also  affect the quality of the runtime product directly.
```

> This would include, for another example, something like CMake, which in most ways does not impact the quality of the product.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This would include, for another example, something like CMake, which in most ways does not  affect the quality of the product.
```

> There's obviously a lot of ambiguity in this area, as you could argue for or against a variety of dependencies and how they impact the package.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
There's obviously a lot of ambiguity in this area, as you could argue for or against a variety of dependencies and how they affect the quality of a package.
```

> However, the point is to require the maintainers of the package to examine each dependency, justify why they do or do not impact the quality, and document that so that peer reviewers and consumers of the package can make their own evaluation.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
However, the point is to require the maintainers of the package to examine each dependency, justify why they do or do not affect quality, and document that so that peer reviewers and consumers of the package can make their own evaluation.
```

You may either try to apply the requirements for the quality levels described here, or you may wish to simply argue the quality without using these requirements as a ruler.
In either case, for each direct "non-ROS" dependency your "quality declaration" should include a justification as to why it is acceptable to depend on this software and still claim your package's level of quality.
This may simply be text justification, or it may link to other analysis or discussions had by community members rationalizing the choice.
The important point is that each dependency is considered, justified, and that the justification is documented, so that users of the package can read the justification and decide for themselves if it is acceptable or not.

Any important caveats or justified exceptions for your dependencies should be mentioned (or referenced) in your own package's "quality declaration" document.

For example, if your package depends on ``rclcpp``, and ``rclcpp`` claims 'level 1' quality with the caveat that this requires you use an rmw implementation that also meets the 'level 1' quality standard, then your package's "quality declaration" document should mention this as well.

> Perhaps just saying that one of your dependencies, ``rclcpp``, has some caveats and then link to ``rclcpp``'s own "quality declaration".

Reviewer 4: The last sentence should perhaps be the only one (after rephrasing).

There is no enforcement or checking of these claims, but instead it's just sufficient to present this information to potential users.
If the users feel that the justifications are insufficient or incorrect, they can open issues against the repository and resolve it with the maintainers.

There should be one or more communal lists of 'Level 1' (and maybe 'Level 2' or 'Level 3') quality level packages.
These lists should be modified via change requests (maybe a text document in a repository) so that there can be peer review.
This document will not prescribe how or where these lists should be hosted, but one thought is that the list could live on the main ROS 2 documentation website.

Quality Level 2
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

These are packages which need to be solidly developed and might be used in production environments, but are not strictly required, or are commonly replaced by custom solutions.
This can also include packages which are not yet up to 'Level 1' but intend to be in the future.

> Package Requirements

Reviewer 4: Could we perhaps list what requirements a level 2 package does *not* have to fulfil? That would be a shorter list I believe and would make it easier to see what the differences are.

Doesn't need to be either/or: could very briefly list the 'dropped' requirements and still keep what is here now.

Package Requirements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*Note: bullets below that start with [ROS Core], will be the prescription for what we do in the core packages in order to meet the associated requirements*

Requirements to be considered a 'Level 4' package:

* Version Policy:

  * No requirements, but having a policy is still recommended (e.g. ``semver``), even if the version is not yet stable (e.g. >= 1.0.0 for ``semver``)

* Change Control Process:

  * No explicit change control process required, but still recommended

* Documentation:

  * Must have a declared license or set of licenses
  * Must have a copyright statement in each source file
  * [ROS Core]:

    * Must have automated checks for copyright statements and licenses
    * Must use the Apache 2.0 license, unless the package has an existing permissive license (e.g. rviz uses three-clause BSD)

* Testing:

  * No explicit testing requirements, though covering some if not all of the features with tests is recommended

* Dependencies:

  * No restrictions

* Platform Support:

  * May support all tier 1 platforms for ROS 2, as defined in `REP-2000 <https://www.ros.org/reps/rep-2000.html#support-tiers>`_

> Any package that does not claim to be 'Level 3' or higher is automatically 'Level 4'.

Reviewer 4: This may again be my understanding of English, but: does "higher" mean higher quality, or at a level with a higher (larger?) number?

```suggestion
Any package which does not claim to be 'Level 3' or higher is automatically 'Level 4'.
```

Author: I meant higher standard, which in this case means a lower number. I can rephrase it to be clearer.

I'd also be open to renaming/rewording this jargon to be less confusing, maybe we could just letters, or something else.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Any package that does not claim to be 'Level 3' or higher quality is automatically 'Level 4'.
```
"that" is correct here, not "which"

Refer to the detailed description of the requirements in the Quality Level 1 section above for more information.

Quality Level 5
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Packages in this category simply do not meet even the 'Level 4' requirements, and for that reason should not be used.
The rationale being that all packages should have at least a declare license or licenses and should include copyright statements in each file.

Repository Organization
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Since these categories are applied on a per package basis, and since there may be more than one package per source repository, it's recommended that the strictest set of policies apply to the whole repository.
This is recommended, rather than trying to mix processes depending on which packages are changed in a given change request (pull request or merge request, etc.).
If this is too onerous, then it's recommended to split lower quality packages out into a separate repository.

Motivation
==========

TBD

Rationale
=========

TBD

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

> Since there are no preceeding standards in this space, at least in the ROS community, of which we are aware, there are no backwards compatibility concerns.

Reviewer 4: It may not have been as rigorously standardised in a REP, but at least in ROS-Industrial we've had the [Software Status indicators](http://wiki.ros.org/Industrial/Software_Status) for quite a while now.

These are not a bw-compatibility concern, but I believe they do qualify as existing work/prior art.

Author: Ah thanks, I looked briefly for this (I remembered something from ROS-I) but couldn't find it (I think I was looking for the 'quality' keyword). My mistake. I'll include it here, but as you say I don't think they're incompatible or affect backwards compatibility. I'll also read up on this wiki page and see if anything should be incorporated into this REP from it.

Reference Implementation
========================

TBD: Link to "ROS Core" perscription for how to actually achieve each quality level.

References and Footnotes
========================

.. [1] Initial discussions about this REP:
   https://github.com/ros2/ros2_documentation/pull/460

Copyright
=========

> Copyright 2019 Open Source Robotics Foundation, Inc.

Reviewer 4: Is this on purpose? All (I believe) other REPs:

> ha[ve] been placed in the public domain.

([REP 2000](https://github.com/ros-infrastructure/rep/blame/190c7a8ecf83293741a0573b59616c5c96f9779c/rep-2000.rst#L584) fi)

Author: Yeah, I'm not sure. I placed the license on this as CCA4 because that's what it was from index.ros.org, where I moved it from.

I thought the copyright should be set, even if it should be freely available for reuse.

I don't feel strongly about this, public domain is fine by me actually.

I'll just @gerkey on this to see what he thinks.

Reviewer 9: I think that we should continue our pattern of following the PEP example (which has worked well so far). From [PEP 1](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0001/):

> Copyright/license -- Each new PEP must be placed under a dual license of public domain and CC0-1.0-Universal.

In that case, we'd use text like this in a REP:

> This document is placed in the public domain or under the CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.

Author: Just to be clear, I'll remove the copyright and license subsections in this document and instead have a "Copyright" subsection (or should it be "Copyright and License"?) which has the PEP recommended text?

Reviewer 9: I propose following PEP's [example](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0001/#copyright) of including a "Copyright" section whose content is that one sentence.

From browsing PEPs, it seems that they somewhat recently adopted this policy and are not retroactively applying it older PEPs (some older ones have no copyright section, some say just public domain). That also seems like a sensible approach for us.

Author: See c2ba03b for the fix. Thanks @gavanderhoorn and @gerkey.

Status: Active
Type: Informational
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 17-Dec-2019
Post-History: 17-Dec-2019

Abstract
========

This REP describes a set of categories meant to convey the quality or maturity of packages in the ROS ecosystem.
Inclusion in a category, or quality level, is based on the policies to which a package adheres.
The categories address version, change control, documentation, testing, dependency and platform support policies.

Motivation
==========

The purpose of this REP is to provide standard guidelines regarding package quality, for both maintainers and consumers.

The categories are meant to set quality expectations for package consumers, not to enforce quality rules on maintainers.
Package maintainers are responsible for establishing processes and documenting how their package's policies achieve a certain quality level.
With the help of documented policies, package consumers can better evaluate whether a package or its dependencies meet the standards for use in their projects.

By providing these rough goals for package maintainers to strive towards, the categories will also encourage better quality across the ROS ecosystem.

Specification
=============

> There are four quality levels below, each roughly summarized as:

Reviewer 10: I find it odd that you start out saying there's 4 levels, but below you specify 5.

Author: The fifth ("default") level was added afterwards, so it's probably just a typo.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The chart below compares Quality Levels 1 through 5 relative to the 'Level 1' requirements' numbering scheme above.

✓ = required

● = recommended

.. list-table:: Quality Levels
    :widths: 5 10 10 10 10 10
    :header-rows: 1
    :stub-columns: 1
    :align: left

    * -
      - Level 1
      - Level 2
      - Level 3
      - Level 4
      - Level 5
    * - 1.i
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ●
      -
    * - 1.ii
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ✓
      -
      -
    * - 1.iii
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ●
      -
      -
    * - 1.iv
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ✓
      -
      -
    * - 1.v
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ✓
      -
      -
    * - 1.vi
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ●
      -
      -
    * - 2.i
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ●
      -
    * - 2.ii
      - ✓
      - ✓
      -
      -
      -
    * - 2.iii
      - ✓
      -
      -
      -
      -
    * - 2.iv
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ✓
      -
      -
    * - 2.v
      - ✓
      -
      -
      -
      -
    * - 3.i
      - ✓
      - ✓
      -
      -
      -
    * - 3.ii
      - ✓
      -
      -
      -
      -
    * - 3.iii
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ✓

>       -

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
      - ✓
```
The text below suggests that even level 5 packages should have licenses.

Author: Yes you're right, that text is a bit opinionated, and is meant to be a stern, but it's still a recommendation in my eyes. Software lacking a license would by default fall into level 5 too. But either way it shouldn't be blank here I think.

@maryaB-osr do you think this should be a check or a circle (indicating a recommendation)?

Reviewer 8: > Packages in this category cannot even meet the simple 'Level 4' requirements, and for that reason should not be used.
All packages should have at least a declared license or set of licenses and should include copyright statements in each file.

I understood Level 5's description to mean that level 5 packages don't meet level 4 qualifications, so they should not be used _because_ packages should at least have license and copyright statements in order to be usable, and they don't even have that.

If you're recommending that even level 5 packages have license and copyright statements, I think the level 5 description needs to be reworded to express that. And then there won't be a level to describe packages that don't have that documentation. Additionally, will it still be fair to say level 5 packages "should not be used" even though they may or may not have a license and copyright declaration?

Author: This is what the current doc says about QL 5:

> Quality Level 5
> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
>
> Packages in this category cannot even meet the simple 'Level 4' requirements, and for that reason should not be used.
> All packages should have at least a declared license or set of licenses and should include copyright statements in each file.

So it already says it should not be used.

The last sentence is just an opinionated thing essentially equivalent to:

> If it doesn't have a license and/or copyright statement then it isn't software.

Which is obviously not true, but again it's stern and opinionated.

We could reword the last sentence to be:

> Quality level 5 has no requirements, but we still strongly recommend all packages have a license and copyright statement, ideally in each file.

Or something similar?

Reviewer 8: That makes sense. I still find it odd that it goes from saying packages in this category should not be used to recommending requirements for it. It seems like a throwaway category.

I would suggest just getting rid of the first sentence because it seems to contradict the recommendation, both by saying it doesn't meet level 4 (level 4's only requirement is a license and copyright statement) and by saying it shouldn't be used.

> Quality level 5 has no requirements, but we still strongly recommend all packages have a license and copyright statement, ideally in each file.
A package without a license and copyright statement should not be used.

   #. Must have a copyright statement in each source file
   #. Must have a "quality declaration" document, which declares the quality level and justifies how the package meets each of the requirements

      #. *Must have a section in the repository's ``README`` which contains the "quality declaration" or links to it*
      #. *Must register with a centralized list of 'Level 2' packages, if one exists, to allow for peer review of the claim*

#. **Testing:**

   #. Must have system tests which cover all items in the "feature" documentation
   #. Code Coverage:

      #. *Must have code coverage tracking for the package*

   #. Linters and Static Analysis

      #. *Must have a code style and enforce it*
      #. *Must use static analysis tools where applicable*

#. **Dependencies:**

   #. Must not have direct runtime "ROS" dependencies which are not 'Level 2' dependencies, but...
   #. May have optional direct runtime "ROS" dependencies which are not 'Level 2', e.g. tracing or debugging features that can be disabled
   #. Must have justification for why each direct runtime "non-ROS" dependency is equivalent to a 'Level 2' package in terms of quality

#. **Platform Support:**

>    #. Must support all tier 1 platforms for ROS 2, as defined in `REP-2000 <https://www.ros.org/reps/rep-2000.html#support-tiers>`_

Reviewer 10: Is there another way to word this (and the similar reqs below) in a way that includes ROS 1?

Author: How about:

> - Must support all target platforms for the package's ecosystem.
>   - For ROS 2 this means supporting all tier 1 platforms, as defined in ...

---

> (and the similar reqs below)

Can you point out each that you think has this issue?

Even this case (platform support), was meant to be only a milestone, with the idea that ROS 1 packages could simply state something like this in its quality declaration:

> This package only support Ubuntu X, Y, Z, as these are the only required platforms for ROS 1 according to REP-0003 (https://www.ros.org/reps/rep-0003.html).

But I take the point that as written it seems biased towards ROS 2. For the other cases though, we similarly tried to generalize them, so that's why I'm asking you to call out the other cases specifically.

Reviewer 10: > Can you point out each that you think has this issue?
I just mean the other instances of this same point.

Author: Ah, sorry, I thought you meant other (different) requirements with the same issue (bias towards ROS 2).

   #. Must have peer review policy for all change requests (e.g. require one or more reviewers)
   #. Must have Continuous Integration (CI) policy for all change requests
   #. Must have documentation policy for all change requests

#. **Documentation:**

   #. Must have documentation for each "feature" (e.g. for ``rclcpp``: create a node, publish a message, spin, etc.)
   #. Must have documentation for each item in the public API (e.g. functions, classes, etc.)
   #. Must have a declared license or set of licenses
   #. Must have a copyright statement in each source file
   #. Must have a "quality declaration" document, which declares the quality level and justifies how the package meets each of the requirements

      #. *Must have a section in the repository's ``README`` which contains the "quality declaration" or links to it*
      #. *Must register with a centralized list of 'Level N' packages, if one exists, to allow for peer review of the claim*

#. **Testing:**

   #. Must have system tests which cover all items in the "feature" documentation
   #. Must have system, integration, and/or unit tests which cover all of the public API
   #. Code Coverage:

>       #. *Must have code coverage tracking for the package*

Reviewer 11: Propose to have an acceptance criteria of minimum 90% of code lines covered by unit tests

Author: We have explicitly avoided concrete numbers because we don't believe we can give a number that works for every package. The point is for package maintainers to declare what their policy is and describe why they think it is sufficient.

If you want more prescriptive numbers and guidelines, those will be available in the developer guide:

https://github.com/ros2/ros2_documentation/blob/master/source/Contributing/Developer-Guide.rst#code-coverage

      #. *Must have and enforce a code coverage policy for new changes*

   #. Performance:

      #. *Must have performance tests (exceptions allowed if they don't make sense to have)*
      #. *Must have a performance regression policy (i.e. blocking either changes or releases on unexpected performance regressions)*

   #. Linters and Static Analysis:

>       #. *Must have a code style and enforce it*

Reviewer 11: Propose to have an acceptance criteria of NO static analysis warnings remaining at this level

Author: We discussed this too, I think that we avoided saying that because there are some static code analysis tools which give false positives due to their aggressive nature. It was also not clear if suppressing these was sufficient to meet a "no failures/warnings" criteria or if it was even helpful to do that.

Also, any recommendations on what "no warnings" means for specific tools is, in my opinion, to prescriptive for this REP. It depends heavily on your target audience and your technology (which programming language you're using for example). As we discussed here:

https://github.com/ros-infrastructure/rep/pull/218#discussion_r381630440

I think the REP remaining broad in this case is good, simply because there's so much diversity under this point in terms of tools and outputs. It would be good to have this kind of stronger recommendations in the ROS 2 developer guide or as part of `ament_lint_common`. 

Do others have opinions about this?

      #. *Must use static analysis tools where applicable*

#. **Dependencies:**

   #. Must not have direct runtime "ROS" dependencies which are not at the same level as the package in question ('Level N'), but...
   #. May have optional direct runtime "ROS" dependencies which are not 'Level N', e.g. tracing or debugging features that can be disabled
   #. Must have justification for why each direct runtime "non-ROS" dependency is equivalent to a 'Level N' package in terms of quality

#. **Platform Support:**

>    #. Must support all tier 1 platforms for ROS 2, as defined in `REP-2000 <https://www.ros.org/reps/rep-2000.html#support-tiers>`_

Reviewer 10: and up here too

#. **Version Policy:**

   #. The same as 'Level 1' packages

#. **Change Control Process:**

   #. Must have all code changes occur through a change request (e.g. pull request, merge request, etc.)
   #. Must have confirmation of contributor origin (e.g. `DCO  <https://developercertificate.org/>`_, CLA, etc.)
   #. Must have Continuous Integration (CI) policy for all change requests

#. **Documentation:**

   #. Must have documentation for each "feature" (e.g. for ``rclcpp``: create a node, publish a message, spin, etc.)
   #. Must have a declared license or set of licenses
   #. Must have a copyright statement in each source file
   #. Must have a "quality declaration" document, which declares the quality level and justifies how the package meets each of the requirements

      #. *Must have a section in the repository's ``README`` which contains the "quality declaration" or links to it*
      #. *Must register with a centralized list of 'Level 2' packages, if one exists, to allow for peer review of the claim*

#. **Testing:**

   #. Must have system tests which cover all items in the "feature" documentation
   #. Code Coverage:

>       #. *Must have code coverage tracking for the package*

Reviewer 11: Propose to have an acceptance criteria of at least 75% code lines coverage for unit tests at this level

Author: Similar to this comment: https://github.com/ros-infrastructure/rep/pull/218#discussion_r393888000

Except that in addition to avoiding a specific number we didn't want to have a requirement to maintain a certain level for this quality level. Instead we thought it was sufficient to just have tracking at this level.

I'd like to hear more of why you think this is important and more from others on this issue.

      #. *No requirement to keep API/ABI stability within a stable ROS release, but it is still recommended*

#. **Change Control Process:**

   #. Must have all code changes occur through a change request (e.g. pull request, merge request, etc.)
   #. Must have Continuous Integration (CI) policy for all change requests

#. **Documentation:**

   #. Must have a declared license or set of licenses
   #. Must have a copyright statement in each source file
   #. May have a "quality declaration" document, which declares the quality level and justifies how the package meets each of the requirements

      #. *Must have a section in the repository's ``README`` which contains the "quality declaration" or links to it*
      #. *May register with a centralized list of 'Level 3' packages, if one exists, to allow for peer review of the claim*

#. **Testing:**

   #. No explicit testing requirements, though covering some if not all of the features with tests is recommended

#. **Dependencies:**

   #. May have direct runtime "ROS" dependencies which are not 'Level 3' dependencies, but they should still be documented in the quality declaration

#. **Platform Support:**

>    #. Must support all tier 1 platforms for ROS 2, as defined in `REP-2000 <https://www.ros.org/reps/rep-2000.html#support-tiers>`_

Reviewer 10: Like here

Refer to the detailed description of the requirements following the Quality Level 1 section above for more information.

Quality Level 4
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

These are demos, tutorials, or experiments.
They don't have strict requirements, but are not excluded from having good documentation or tests.
For example, this might be a tutorial package which is not intended for reuse but has excellent documentation because it serves primarily as an example to others.

Package Requirements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Requirements to be considered a 'Level 4' package:

#. **Version Policy:**

   #. No requirements, but having a policy is still recommended (e.g. ``semver``), even if the version is not yet stable (e.g. >= 1.0.0 for ``semver``)

#. **Change Control Process:**

   #. No explicit change control process required, but still recommended

#. **Documentation:**

   #. Must have a declared license or set of licenses
   #. Must have a copyright statement in each source file

#. **Testing:**

   #. No explicit testing requirements, though covering some if not all of the features with tests is recommended

#. **Dependencies:**

   #. No restrictions

#. **Platform Support:**

>    #. May support all tier 1 platforms for ROS 2, as defined in `REP-2000 <https://www.ros.org/reps/rep-2000.html#support-tiers>`_

Reviewer 10: and here

   #. Linters and Static Analysis:

      #. *Must have a code style and enforce it*
      #. *Must use static analysis tools where applicable*

#. **Dependencies:**

   #. Must not have direct runtime "ROS" dependencies which are not at the same level as the package in question ('Level N'), but...
   #. May have optional direct runtime "ROS" dependencies which are not 'Level N', e.g. tracing or debugging features that can be disabled
   #. Must have justification for why each direct runtime "non-ROS" dependency is equivalent to a 'Level N' package in terms of quality

#. **Platform Support:**

   #. Must support all target platforms for the package's ecosystem.

      * For ROS 2 this means supporting all tier 1 platforms, as defined in `REP-2000 <https://www.ros.org/reps/rep-2000.html#support-tiers>`_

If the above points are satisfied then a package can be considered 'Level 1'.
Refer to the detailed description of the requirements below the chart for more information.

Quality Level Comparison Chart
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The chart below compares Quality Levels 1 through 5 relative to the 'Level 1' requirements' numbering scheme above.

✓ = required

● = recommended

> .. list-table:: Quality Levels

Reviewer 5: The table is great! I'm not sure if this has already been discussed, but to reduce repetition, the items could be described only once, and the table serve as the reference for all levels. As opposed to the items being repeated for every level.

Reviewer 8: We did have this conversation and I think there were a couple (soft) reasons for having both:
Jumping back and forth to the level 1 description will be annoying, so it's better to give people the option to read through the requirements for each level since it's easier. The text lists can stand alone as a resource and the chart can be a quick reference just for comparison's sake, not content.

Neither of us felt really strongly about either option though. It is pretty repetitive

Reviewer 5: Ok, I can see that. I don't feel strongly about this, but thanks for the clarification.

'Level 5' has no requirements, but we still strongly recommend all packages have a license and copyright statement, ideally in each file.

Repository Organization
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Since these categories are applied on a per package basis, and since there may be more than one package per source repository, it's recommended that the strictest set of policies apply to the whole repository.
This is recommended rather than trying to mix processes depending on which packages are changed in a given change request (pull request or merge request, etc.).
If this is too onerous, then it's recommended to split lower quality packages out into a separate repository.

Reference Implementation
========================

The `ROS 2 Developer Guide <https://index.ros.org/doc/ros2/Contributing/Developer-Guide/>`_ describes the policies we implement to achieve Quality Level 1 for ROS Core packages.

The `rcutils package's quality declaration <https://github.com/ros2/rcutils/pull/202/files>`_ is one example of the conditions of this REP in practice on a non-trivial package.

.. update link when that draft is merged

> Quality Declaration Template

Reviewer 5: I suggest adding the item numbers to the template for quicker referencing.

Reviewer 8: https://github.com/ros-infrastructure/rep/pull/244

Such a package may upgrade to 'Level 1' at a later date, if it proves to be a solution that people want to use in their products.

Tools, like ``rostopic``\ , generally do not fall into this category either, but are not categorically excluded.
For example, it may be the case that the tool which launches and verifies a ROS graph (``ros2launch``\ ) may need to be considered 'Level 1' for use in production systems.

Package Requirements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Requirements to be considered a 'Level 1' package:

.. _Version Policy:

1. **Version Policy:**

   .. _1.i:

   i. Must have a version policy (e.g. ``semver``)

   .. _1.ii:

   ii. Must be at a stable version (e.g. for ``semver`` that means version >= 1.0.0)

   .. _1.iii:

   iii. Must have a strictly declared public API

   .. _1.iv:

   iv. Must have a policy for API stability

   .. _1.v:

   v. Must have a policy for ABI stability

   .. _1.vi:

   vi. Must have a policy that keeps API and ABI stability within a released ROS distribution

.. _Change Control Process:

2. **Change Control Process:**

   .. _2.i:

>    i. Must have all code changes occur through a change request (e.g. pull request, merge request, etc.)

Reviewer 12: We need to define a time window for this criteria. E.g. Level 1 requires that all pushes since the last 30 days? last release? to have all been reviewed. Otherwise, it feels like if a single PR skips review, the repo will never be level 1 ever again.

Author: This is a requirement of the process, not the code's history. In my opinion this simply means you need to have a policy that says you do this. It doesn't mean that if you ever in your past did not have this policy you cannot be level 1.

Obviously you can argue that code that at one point didn't have this policy in place isn't "good enough", but I think that's also impractical since basically all code in our ecosystem may have had that in their past.

Instead, I would say, when transitioning to requiring code reviews you have to do a review of the entire code base, or other justify why that is not needed, in order to "catch things up". I don't think saying, "wait 30 days and what you did before then doesn't matter any more" doesn't really improve the code.

Reviewer 12: Sure, but if you take a level 1 package, and apply a change without a review, what is the consequence?

Reviewer 12: Or maybe we could make this more actionable?

Taking GitHub as an example:

* Require pull request reviews before merging
* Require status checks to pass before merging
* Require branches to be up to date before merging
* DCO

Reviewer 5: > if you take a level 1 package, and apply a change without a review, what is the consequence?

I'd say that it's up to each project to decide and document their policies.

Since this REP has a few "For ROS 2 this means...", I think we could come up with a policy for ROS 2 core and document it here or in the developer guide. I think the guide is a better place for *all* these ROS 2 specific guidelines, so we don't need to come back and change the REP every time the technology evolves.

So, talking about ROS 2:

> define a time window for this criteria

I don't think a time-based "penalty" makes sense in this case. The project could revert the changes and be back at where they were straight away.

> maybe we could make this more actionable

I think these are all good things for the ROS 2 core to adopt and document in the developer guide. One major technical difficulty right now with adding GitHub merge checks is that the bloom release process needs to commit directly to the release branch. The team is looking into ways around this for the core packages, possibly using GitHub bots.

1. **Version Policy:**

   i. No requirements, but having a policy is still recommended (e.g. ``semver``), even if the version is not yet stable (e.g. >= 1.0.0 for ``semver``)

2. **Change Control Process:**

   i. No explicit change control process required, but still recommended

3. **Documentation:**

   i. Must have a declared license or set of licenses
   ii. Must have a copyright statement in each source file

4. **Testing:**

   i. No explicit testing requirements, though covering some if not all of the features with tests is recommended

5. **Dependencies:**

   i. No restrictions

6. **Platform Support:**

   i. Must support all target platforms for the package's ecosystem.

      * For ROS 2 this means supporting all tier 1 platforms, as defined in `REP-2000 <https://www.ros.org/reps/rep-2000.html#support-tiers>`_

Any package that does not claim to be 'Level 3' or higher is automatically 'Level 4'.
Refer to the detailed description of the requirements following the Quality Level 1 section above for more information.

Quality Level 5
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Packages in this category cannot even meet the simple 'Level 4' requirements, and for that reason should not be used.

> 'Level 5' has no requirements, but we still strongly recommend all packages have a license and copyright statement, ideally in each file.

Reviewer 13: I would like to propose that quality level 5 also requires to have a license in the repo (either a license.txt or a field in the package.xml) because without one, there's no safe / legal way that I am aware of to use that code. I think even the lowest quality should require some explicit licensing somewhere in the project.

Reviewer 14: When I lobbied to get Level 5 included it was intended to be the catch all for everything that doesn’t adhere to QL4. 

I explicitly wanted a level that we could use in a future central quality repository that meant “this package is actually legally or otherwise dangerous to use”.

Reviewer 13: Huh interesting. Ok, I can get behind that. I wonder though if someone hasn't bothered with a license or any minimal level to get to L4 if they'll ever think to declare it at all to be indexed. But I do like having that option available for other people to tag it as L5 (e.g. folks poking to it and saying "that's dangerous") even if they are unaware.

Reviewer 11: > When I lobbied to get Level 5 included it was intended to be the catch all for everything that doesn’t adhere to QL4.
> 
> I explicitly wanted a level that we could use in a future central quality repository that meant “this package is actually legally or otherwise dangerous to use”.

I also agree it may be good to have a catch all - "not safe to be used in most circumstances"

   .. _2.ii:

   ii. Must have confirmation of contributor origin (e.g. `DCO  <https://developercertificate.org/>`_, CLA, etc.)

   .. _2.iii:

   iii. Must have peer review policy for all change requests (e.g. require one or more reviewers)

   .. _2.iv:

   iv. Must have Continuous Integration (CI) policy for all change requests

   .. _2.v:

   v. Must have documentation policy for all change requests

.. _Documentation:

3. **Documentation:**

   .. _3.i:

   i. Must have documentation for each "feature" (e.g. for ``rclcpp``: create a node, publish a message, spin, etc.)

   .. _3.ii:

   ii. Must have documentation for each item in the public API (e.g. functions, classes, etc.)

   .. _3.iii:

   iii. Must have a declared license or set of licenses

   .. _3.iv:

   iv. Must have a copyright statement in each source file

   .. _3.v:

   v. Must have a "quality declaration" document, which declares the quality level and justifies how the package meets each of the requirements

      .. _3.v.a:

      a. *Must have a section in the repository's ``README`` which contains the "quality declaration" or links to it*

      .. _3.v.b:

>       b. *Must register with a centralized list of 'Level N' packages, if one exists, to allow for peer review of the claim*

Reviewer 15: ```suggestion
      b. *Must allow peer review of this claim and, if one exists, register with a centralized list of 'Level N' packages*
```
I think the important part of this section is making clear that a QD claim can be reviewed publicly. As the document says:

> There should be one or more communal lists of 'Level 1' (and maybe 'Level 2' or 'Level 3') quality level packages.

This implies there may not be a list for all the package levels. The wording change suggestion will allow flexibility around the centralized list and making emphasis around the peer review part.

Author: I don't feel like this is any better or worse than the current line. These two things are connected, so listing one before the other doesn't seem to change the importance to me.

Like "I must buy food therefore I must go to the store" versus "I must go to the store, so that I can buy food", they don't indicate which is more important.

@maryaB-osr what do you think?

Author: Also, with the new wording it sounds like disallowing peer review was an option, which is not really the case,  you cannot stop peer review of your open source project. Instead I would say "Must seek peer review...", but that's what you are trying to do by registering with a centralized list...

Reviewer 8: The suggestion is incorrect because it changes the target of "_if ones exists_" to the "_this claim_" immediately preceding it. We can understand it because we know that the Level N lists may or may not exist, but someone reading that for the first time could easily mistake the condition to be whether a claim/QD exists.

Reviewer 15: @maryaB-osr I agree with both of you, my wording was not correct. I mainly wanted to raise a couple of concerns related to the "Centralized list":

1. If that list doesn't exist or if the package is not registered in that list, will that affect the quality stated by the package? (even if their authors explicitly state in their Quality Declarations they are open for peer reviews of their claims?)

2. If that list exists, but the package claims are updated faster than the list (as I suppose that list will require some sort of maintenance), will those claims be invalid until the list is updated?

My suggestion is to make emphasis in allowing peer review while making the list as something secondary in comparison:
*Must allow peer review of the quality level claims. And also should register with a centralized list of 'Level N' packages (if one exists)*

Author: > If that list doesn't exist or if the package is not registered in that list, will that affect the quality stated by the package? (even if their authors explicitly state in their Quality Declarations they are open for peer reviews of their claims?)

No, I don't see why it would.

> If that list exists, but the package claims are updated faster than the list (as I suppose that list will require some sort of maintenance), will those claims be invalid until the list is updated?

No, the list should not just include which packages, but which versions of the package are in one quality level or another. If the package makes improvements to their quality level without releasing a new version of their package, then they could ask for a re-evaluation on one list or another.

I think what you confusion is from is that the list is entirely supplemental to the quality declaration. The package maintainers must have a QD and must declare that they are in a certain level. A user can use that information directly and evaluate the claims in their QD themselves. I'd recommend this path for any users with serious quality or safety concerns, i.e. trust but independently verify.

Completely separately, we can (and should) have peer-reviewed lists of packages which confirm the packages are in the quality level they declare. More casual users may "trust" or "depend on" these lists rather than verifying the claims themselves. But then they are explicitly trusting the maintainers of the list instead, and in exchange they have a lot less work to do. But again, I'll emphasize, the peer review is entirely optional and the curated lists are entirely optional, and the quality level of the package and the quality declaration do not depend on these lists or peer reviews. We recommend that package maintainers seek peer review (primarily by trying to get on one of these peer reviewed lists), but we have no way of enforcing that.

With respect to:

> My suggestion is to make emphasis in allowing peer review while making the list as something secondary in comparison:
Must allow peer review of the quality level claims. And also should register with a centralized list of 'Level N' packages (if one exists)

I'll just quote myself, since it doesn't make sense to me:

> Also, with the new wording it sounds like disallowing peer review was an option, which is not really the case, you cannot stop peer review of your open source project. Instead I would say "Must seek peer review...", but that's what you are trying to do by registering with a centralized list...

Reviewer 8: > 1. If that list doesn't exist or if the package is not registered in that list, will that affect the quality stated by the package? (even if their authors explicitly state in their Quality Declarations they are open for peer reviews of their claims?)

@Blast545 I think you're putting too much emphasis on the "peer review" part of this requirement. This is the only requirement that mentions peer review, and it's only part of a conditional: "_If_ the list exists, then the package must register with it, _in turn_ allowing for peer review". Peer review is just a side effect of registering with the list. As soon as "If the list exists" is not true, the rest of the statement is not a requirement anymore. There's no responsibility to explicitly seek review besides using these lists. The "Quality Declaration and Claim" section below makes this clear.

I would say that if the package is not registered with an existing list, then yes that would affect the quality level. Otherwise, what is 3.v.b. qualifying?

@wjwwood I think where you said:

> ...the peer review is entirely optional and the curated lists are entirely optional, and the quality level of the package and the quality declaration do not depend on these lists or peer reviews.

That should mean "entirely optional _if the list doesn't exist_"? If you mean "optional even if the list exists" then this needs to say "**Should** register with a centralized list..." and needs to be marked as a recommendation (●) and not a requirement (✓) in the table.

Author: I think "Should register with a centralized list..." is appropriate. I think there's value in the QD and the self declared quality level even if they're not part of a list. It also causes a catch 22, where you cannot apply to the list until you have declared your level and you cannot declare level 1 because you are not on the list yet.

I would move to make adding yourself to a list, the list, all the lists, etc... to be a recommendation and not a requirement.

What makes sense to me as a requirement is that if your package is a part of one or more lists that you reference them in your QD.

Author: > I would say that if the package is not registered with an existing list, then yes that would affect the quality level. Otherwise, what is 3.v.b. qualifying?

I think maybe 3.v.b is unnecessary (my fault for including it). As I said above, I think that recommending maintainers try to register with a list and generally seek peer review is good enough. If there's any require it is to list the peer reviewing and lists your package has had in your QD, but only to make it easier for consumers of the QD to connect the dots.

Reviewer 15: Yes, it wasn't clear to me the purpose of this section.

> Completely separately, we can (and should) have peer-reviewed lists of packages which confirm the packages are in the quality level they declare. More casual users may "trust" or "depend on" these lists rather than verifying the claims themselves. But then they are explicitly trusting the maintainers of the list instead, and in exchange they have a lot less work to do.

This sounds good to me!

      -
      -
      -
      -
    * - 3.i_
      - ✓
      - ✓
      -
      -
      -
    * - 3.ii_
      - ✓
      -
      -
      -
      -
    * - 3.iii_
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ●
    * - 3.iv_
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ✓
      -
    * - 3.v_
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ●
      -
      -
    * - 3.v.a_
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ✓
      -
      -
    * - 3.v.b_
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ●
      -
      -
    * - 4.i_
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ●
      - ●
      -
    * - 4.ii_
      - ✓
      -
      -
      -
      -
    * - 4.iii.a_
      - ✓
      - ✓
      -
      -
      -
    * - 4.iii.b_
      - ✓
      -
      -
      -
      -
    * - 4.iv.a_
      - ✓
      -
      -
      -
      -
    * - 4.iv.b_
      - ✓
      -
      -
      -
      -
    * - 4.v.a_
      - ✓
      - ✓
      -
      -
      -
    * - 4.v.b_
      - ✓
      - ✓
      -
      -
      -
    * - 5.i_
      - ✓
      - ✓
      -
      -
      -
    * - 5.ii_
      - ●
      - ●
      - ●
      -
      -
    * - 5.iii_
      - ✓
      - ✓
      -
      -
      -
    * - 6.i_
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ●
      -
    * - 7.i_
      - ✓
      - ✓

>       - ✓

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
      - ●
```

Reviewer: Good catch, thank you!

   ii. Must have Continuous Integration (CI) policy for all change requests

3. **Documentation:**

   i. Must have a declared license or set of licenses
   ii. Must have a copyright statement in each source file
   iii. May have a "quality declaration" document, which declares the quality level and justifies how the package meets each of the requirements

        a. *Must have a section in the repository's ``README`` which contains the "quality declaration" or links to it*
        b. *May register with a centralized list of 'Level 3' packages, if one exists, to allow for peer review of the claim*

4. **Testing:**

   i. No explicit testing requirements, though covering some if not all of the features with tests is recommended

5. **Dependencies:**

   i. May have direct runtime "ROS" dependencies which are not 'Level 3' dependencies, but they should still be documented in the quality declaration

6. **Platform Support:**

   i. Must support all target platforms for the package's ecosystem.

      * For ROS 2 this means supporting all tier 1 platforms, as defined in `REP-2000 <https://www.ros.org/reps/rep-2000.html#support-tiers>`_

7. **Security**

>    i. Must have a declared Vulnerability Disclosure Policy and adhere to a response schedule for addressing security vulnerabilities

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   i. Should have a declared Vulnerability Disclosure Policy and adhere to a response schedule for addressing security vulnerabilities
```

  Below are the rationales, notes, and caveats for this claim, organized by each requirement listed in the [Package Requirements for Quality Level N in REP-2004](https://www.ros.org/reps/rep-2004.html).

  ## Version Policy [1]

  ### Version Scheme [1.i]

  ### Version Stability [1.ii]

  ### Public API Declaration [1.iii]

  ### API Stability Within a Released ROS Distribution [1.iv]/[1.vi]

  ### ABI Stability Within a Released ROS Distribution [1.v]/[1.vi]

  ## Change Control Process [2]

  ### Change Requests [2.i]

  ### Contributor Origin [2.ii]

  ### Peer Review Policy [2.iii]

  ### Continuous Integration [2.iv]

  ### Documentation Policy [2.v]

  ## Documentation [3]

  ### Feature Documentation [3.i]

  ### Public API Documentation [3.ii]

  ### License [3.iii]

  ### Copyright Statement [3.iv]

  ## Testing [4]

  ### Feature Testing [4.i]

  ### Public API Testing [4.ii]

  ### Coverage [4.iii]

  ### Performance [4.iv]

  ### Linters and Static Analysis [4.v]

  ## Dependencies [5]

  ### Direct Runtime ROS Dependencies [5.i]

  ### Optional Direct Runtime ROS Dependencies [5.ii]

  ### Direct Runtime non-ROS Dependency [5.iii]

  ## Platform Support [6]

> 

Reviewer 16: ```suggestion

  ## Security [7]
  
  ### Vulnerability Disclosure Policy [7.i]

```

REP: 2004
Title: Package Quality Categories
Author: William Woodall <william@openrobotics.org>

> Status: Active

Author: Please vote in reply here with `+1` or `-1` to accept this REP or not, respectively. Thanks!

Reviewer 17: :+1:  This is a well thought-through process and has evolved impressively over the last few months. I think it will lead to maintainers striving for higher quality of their own packages, and maybe it will get some people to actually commit to releasing non-beta versions of their packages :stuck_out_tongue_closed_eyes:

Reviewer 5: :+1: +1

Reviewer 18: I think the copyright policy needs work but other than that 👍

Reviewer 15: +1

Reviewer: +1

Author: Ok, I think I've addressed the copyright point for now, we can iterate on it further if needed. We have some +1's here and at least no major -1's, so I'm going to merge this (extremely long running) pull request and redirect everything else to new issues.

Thanks everyone!

   .. _1.iv:

   iv. Must have a policy for API stability

   .. _1.v:

   v. Must have a policy for ABI stability

   .. _1.vi:

   vi. Must have a policy that keeps API and ABI stability within a released ROS distribution

.. _Change Control Process:

2. **Change Control Process:**

   .. _2.i:

   i. Must have all code changes occur through a change request (e.g. pull request, merge request, etc.)

   .. _2.ii:

   ii. Must have confirmation of contributor origin (e.g. `DCO  <https://developercertificate.org/>`_, CLA, etc.)

   .. _2.iii:

   iii. Must have peer review policy for all change requests (e.g. require one or more reviewers)

   .. _2.iv:

   iv. Must have Continuous Integration (CI) policy for all change requests

   .. _2.v:

   v. Must have documentation policy for all change requests

.. _Documentation:

3. **Documentation:**

   .. _3.i:

   i. Must have documentation for each "feature" (e.g. for ``rclcpp``: create a node, publish a message, spin, etc.)

   .. _3.ii:

   ii. Must have documentation for each item in the public API (e.g. functions, classes, etc.)

   .. _3.iii:

   iii. Must have a declared license or set of licenses

   .. _3.iv:

>    iv. Must have a copyright statement in each source file

Reviewer 18: 1. It is not necessary to have a copyright statement in each file for it to be copyrighted under US law
2. No project obeys this currently (CMakeLists.txt and setup.py are certainly source files and tend to never contain copyright)
3. The copyright info is usually incomplete. Why put it in a file header if you need to look at git history to see who *really* wrote a bit of code?
4. This prevents consumption to or from any code in the public domain.

If the intent is to attribute ownership of intellectual property, then it would be better to say that “the project must clearly attribute all authors and the intellectual property rights they maintain”.

Reviewer 4: I've actually wondered about this as well.

Especially because of @clalancette's comment in https://github.com/ros2/ros2_documentation/issues/616#issuecomment-617420434:

> The git commits already contain this information

This REP seems to say something else.

I realise that @clalancette is "just one voice", but it seems even within one organisation there are different ideas about what is needed or not for the copyright management.

(besides that I'm really curious whether "but it's in the git commit history" holds up as an argument in a copyright claim or not, as files can be copied out of a git repository, leaving the git metadata behind, but that would be off-topic here)

Author: I agree this should be modified to be something like "the project must clearly attribute all authors and the intellectual property rights they maintain", as @rotu suggested, and then we can say that the way we happen to do that in ROS 2's core packages is by putting a license and copyright statement in each file that is also checked by our linter. What files are checked by the linter by default can be discussed there.

----

> > The git commits already contain this information 

> This REP seems to say something else.

How so? @clalancette's point, I think, was that if you want to know every contributor then the git history provides that. Most patches provided to our software get added under the existing copyright. If someone wants to add themselves to the copyright statements, that's always allowed, or if someone makes a new file they can have theirs exclusively. That's also allowed. I don't know of a project that requires every contributor to add themselves or their company to every file they touch, if that's the suggested alternative to using the git history for "who has contributed". I don't think this REP says something else either.

Author: I pushed 99c2865 to make this a little more compliant. The developer guide still says "all source files" and that it should be enforced by the "automated linter", so "what is a source file" can be defined/discussed there, and we get away from "what is good enough for copyright statements" and gets the REP back to "you need to handle this and say how you handle it" rather than "this is how you should handle it".

   .. _3.v:

   v. Must have a "quality declaration" document, which declares the quality level and justifies how the package meets each of the requirements

      .. _3.v.a:

      a. *Must have a section in the repository's ``README`` which contains the "quality declaration" or links to it*

      .. _3.v.b:

      b. *Must register with a centralized list of 'Level N' packages, if one exists, to allow for peer review of the claim*

.. _Testing:

> 4. **Testing:**

Reviewer 18: What is the testing policy for things like threadsafety?

Author: I don't think we need anything specific to that, to be honest. The documentation should probably state what the thread-safety status of the methods are, and the tests should aim to check that documented behavior.

I think something like this is out of the scope of this REP because I think (i.e. my opinion) it strays into "write good software" which always tends to be subjective and hard to completely quantify in my experience. Like how do you measure when enough thread-safety testing has been done, does it need to proven somehow (logical proof), is it empirical testing? I don't know. Also, why just thread-safety, why not memory allocations, or blocking behavior, or some other aspect of the software.

If you have some specific in mind, please suggest what you think a reasonable entry here would be and maybe we can agree on something generic and useful enough to include here.

It may also be something good to have in our developer guide or in a contributing or pull request review check list, depending on what you were thinking.

Reviewer 18: > I think something like this is out of the scope of this REP because I think (i.e. my opinion) it strays into "write good software" which always tends to be subjective and hard to completely quantify in my experience.

I agree that this is REALLY hard to nail down in a prescriptive way, and quite possibly belongs elsewhere. It also likely doesn't belong under **Testing** unless and until the community has had more experience ensuring threadsafe code.

> If you have some specific in mind, please suggest what you think a reasonable entry here would be and maybe we can agree on something generic and useful enough to include here.

Challenge accepted!

**Platform Support**:
   ii. Should document additional constraints on the runtime environment, including whether APIs may be used multithreaded, whether filesystem access is required, and what additional sensors or hardware are expected.

Author: At the risk of loosing momentum on this point, I want to wrap up this first version of the REP. I will make a follow up issue for this and if you have time a pull request with what you've suggested would be easier to comment on (and make sure things like: it is considered or not for each quality level, and it is in the table of requirements, etc...).

   .. _5.ii:

   ii. May have optional direct runtime "ROS" dependencies which are not 'Level N', e.g. tracing or debugging features that can be disabled

   .. _5.iii:

   iii. Must have justification for why each direct runtime "non-ROS" dependency is equivalent to a 'Level N' package in terms of quality

.. _Platform Support:

6. **Platform Support:**

   .. _6.i:

   i. Must support all target platforms for the package's ecosystem.

      * For ROS 2 this means supporting all tier 1 platforms, as defined in `REP-2000 <https://www.ros.org/reps/rep-2000.html#support-tiers>`_

7. **Security**

   .. _7.i:

   i. Must have a declared Vulnerability Disclosure Policy and adhere to a response schedule for addressing security vulnerabilities

If the above points are satisfied then a package can be considered 'Level 1'.
Refer to the detailed description of the requirements below the chart for more information.

Quality Level Comparison Chart
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The chart below compares Quality Levels 1 through 5 relative to the 'Level 1' requirements' numbering scheme above.

✓ = required

● = recommended

> 

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion

○ = optional

```

.. list-table:: Quality Levels
    :widths: 5 10 10 10 10 10
    :header-rows: 1
    :stub-columns: 1
    :align: left

    * -
      - Level 1
      - Level 2
      - Level 3
      - Level 4
      - Level 5
    * - 1.i_
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ●
      -
    * - 1.ii_
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ✓
      -
      -
    * - 1.iii_
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ●
      -
      -
    * - 1.iv_
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ✓
      -
      -
    * - 1.v_
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ✓
      -
      -
    * - 1.vi_
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ●
      -
      -
    * - 2.i_
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ●
      -
    * - 2.ii_
      - ✓
      - ✓
      -
      -
      -
    * - 2.iii_
      - ✓
      -
      -
      -
      -
    * - 2.iv_
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ✓
      -
      -
    * - 2.v_
      - ✓
      -
      -
      -
      -
    * - 3.i_
      - ✓
      - ✓
      -
      -
      -
    * - 3.ii_
      - ✓
      -
      -
      -
      -
    * - 3.iii_
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ●
    * - 3.iv_
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ✓
      -
    * - 3.v_
      - ✓
      - ✓

>       - ●

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
      - ○
```

      -
      -
    * - 3.v.a_
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ✓
      -
      -
    * - 3.v.b_
      - ●
      - ●

>       - ●

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
      - ○
```

      -
      -
    * - 3.v.c_
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ✓
      -
      -
    * - 4.i_
      - ✓
      - ✓
      - ●
      - ●
      -
    * - 4.ii_
      - ✓
      -
      -
      -
      -
    * - 4.iii.a_
      - ✓
      - ✓
      -
      -
      -
    * - 4.iii.b_
      - ✓
      -
      -
      -
      -
    * - 4.iv.a_
      - ✓
      -
      -
      -
      -
    * - 4.iv.b_
      - ✓
      -
      -
      -
      -
    * - 4.v.a_
      - ✓
      - ✓
      -
      -
      -
    * - 4.v.b_
      - ✓
      - ✓
      -
      -
      -
    * - 5.i_
      - ✓
      - ✓
      -
      -
      -
    * - 5.ii_

>       - ●
>       - ●
>       - ●

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
      - ○
      - ○
      - ○
```

#. **Dependencies:**

   #. Must not have direct runtime "ROS" dependencies which are not at the same level as the package in question ('Level N'), but...
   #. May have optional direct runtime "ROS" dependencies which are not 'Level N', e.g. tracing or debugging features that can be disabled
   #. Must have justification for why each direct runtime "non-ROS" dependency is equivalent to a 'Level N' package in terms of quality

#. **Platform Support:**

   #. Must support all tier 1 platforms for ROS 2, as defined in `REP-2000 <https://www.ros.org/reps/rep-2000.html#support-tiers>`_

If the above points are satisfied then a package can be considered 'Level 1'.
Refer to the detailed description of the requirements below the chart for more information.

Quality Level Comparison Chart
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The chart below compares Quality Levels 1 through 5 relative to the 'Level 1' requirements' numbering scheme above.

✓ = required

● = recommended

.. list-table:: Quality Levels
    :widths: 5 10 10 10 10 10
    :header-rows: 1
    :stub-columns: 1
    :align: left

    * -
      - Level 1
      - Level 2
      - Level 3
      - Level 4
      - Level 5

>     * - 1.i

Reviewer 15: It would be great adding a column with a brief description of the item after the roman numerals, e.g 
`" 1.i.  |  version policy "`
`" 1.ii. |  stable version "`
So it's easier to read the chart on its own, without scrolling back to the top to remember

Author: Yes, we discussed this back and forth a bit, but we had issues with the formatting. I tend to agree that having only the number references makes it hard to read. A compromise might be to have links for the numbers to the sections to which they correspond.
